JOURNAL OF THE FIRST VOYAGE OF COLUMBUS
This is the first voyage and the routes and direction taken by the Admiral Don Cristóbal Colon when he discovered the Indies, summarized; except the prologue made for the Sovereigns, which is given word for word and commences in this manner
In the name of our Lord 
BECAUSE, O most Christian, and very high, very excellent, and puissant Princes, King and Queen of the Spains and of the islands of the Sea, our Lords, in this present year of 1492,after your Highnesses had given an end to the war with the Moors who reigned in Europe, and had finished it in the very great city of Granada, where in this present year, on the second day of the month of January, by force of arms, I saw the royal banners of your Highnesses placed on the towers of Alhambra, which is the fortress of that city, and I saw the Moorish King come forth from the gates of the city and kiss the royal hands of your Highnesses, and of the Prince my Lord, and presently in that same month, acting on the information that I had given to your Highnesses touching the land of India, and respecting a Prince who is called Gran Can, which means in our language King of Kings, how he and his ancestors had sent to Rome many times to ask for learned men of our holy faith to teach him, and how the Holy Father had never complied, insomuch that many people believing in idolatries were lost by receiving doctrine of perdition: YOUR HIGHNESSES, as Catholic Christians And Princes who love the holy Christian faith; and the propagation of it, and who are enemies to the sect of Mahoma and to all idolatries and heresies, resolved to send me, Cristóbal Colon, to the said parts of India to see the said princes, and the cities and lands, and their disposition, with a view that they might be converted to our holy faith; and ordered that I should not go by land to the eastward; as had been customary, but that I should go by way of the west, whither up to this day, we do not know for certain that any one; has gone.1.
Thus, after having turned out all the Jews from all your kingdoms and lordships, in the same month of January, your Highnesses gave orders to me that with a sufficient fleet I should go to the said parts of India, and for this they made great concessions to me, and ennobled me, so that henceforward I should be called Don, and should be Chief Admiral of the Ocean Sea, perpetual Viceroy and Governor of all the islands and continents that I should discover and gain, and that I might hereafter discover and gain in the Ocean Sea, and that, my eldest son should succeed, and so on from generation to generation for ever.2.
I left the city of Granada on the 12th day of May, in the same year of 1492, being Saturday, and came to the town of Palo., which is a seaport; where I equipped three vessels well suited for such service; and departed from that port, well supplied with provisions and with many sailors, on the 3d day of August of the same year, being Friday, half an hour before sunrise, taking the route to the islands of Canaria, belonging to your Highnesses, which are in the said Ocean Sea, that I might thence take my departure for navigating until I should arrive at the Indies, and give the letters of your Highnesses to those princes, so as to comply with my orders. As part of my duty I thought it well to write an account of all the voyage very punctually, noting from day to day all that I should do and see, and that should happen, as will be seen further on. Also, Lords Princes, I resolved to describe each night what passed in the day, and to note each day how I navigated at night. I propose to construct a new chart for navigating, on which I shall delineate all the sea and lands . of the Ocean in their proper positions under their bearings; and further, I propose to prepare a book, and to put down all as it were in a picture, by latitude from the equator, and western longitude. Above all, I shall have accomplished much, for I shall forget sleep, and shall work at the business of navigation, that so the service may be performed; all which will entail great labor.3.
Friday, 3d of August
We departed on Friday, the 3d of August, in the year 1492, from the bar of Saltes, at 8 o’clock, and proceeded with a strong sea breeze until sunset, towards the south, for 60 mile, equal to 15 leagues; afterwards S.W. and W.S.W., which was the course for the Canaries.4.
Saturday, 4th of August 
They steered S.W. 1/4 S.5.
Sunday, 5th of August
They continued their course day and night more than 40 leagues.6.
Monday, 6th of August
The rudder of the caravel Pinta became unshipped, and Martin Alonso Pinzon, who was in command, believed or suspected that it was by contrivance of Gomes Rascon and Cristóbal Quintero, to .whom the caravel belonged, for they dreaded to go on that voyage. The Admiral says that, before they sailed, these men had been displaying a certain backwardness, so to speak. The Admiral was much disturbed at not being able to help the said caravel without danger, and he says that he was eased of some anxiety when he reflected that Martin Alonso Pinzon was a man of energy and ingenuity. They made, during the day and night, 29 leagues.7.
Tuesday, 7th of August
The rudder of thePinta was shipped and secured, and they proceeded on a course for the island of Lanzarote8.
Wednesday, 8th of August
Opinions respecting their position varied among the pilafs of the three caravels ; but that of the Admiral proved to be nearer the truth. He wished to go to Gran Canaria, to leave the caravel Pinta, because she was disabled by the faulty hanging of her rudder, and was making water. He intended to obtain another there if one could be found. They could not reach the place that day.9.
Thursday, 9th of August
The Admiral was not able to reach Gomera until the night of Sunday, while Martin Alonso remained on that coast of Gran Canaria by order of the Admiral, because his vessel could not be navigated. Afterwards the Admiral took her to Canaria, and they repaired the Pinta very thoroughly through the pains and labor of the Admiral, of Martin Alonso, and of the rest. Finally they came to Gomera. They saw a great fire issue from the mountain of the island of Tenerife, which is of great height. They rigged the Pinta with square sails, for she was lateen rigged; and the Admiral reached Gomera on Sunday, the 2nd of September, with the Pinta repaired.10.
The Admiral says that many honorable Spanish gentlemen who were at Gomera with Doña Ines Peraza, mother of Guillen Peraza (who was afterwards the first Count of Gomera), and who were natives of the island of Hierro, declared that every year they saw land to the west of the Canaries; and others, natives of Gomera, affirmed the same on oath. The Admiral here says that he remembers, when in Portugal in the year 1484, a man came to the King from the island of Madeira, to beg for a caravel to go to this land that was seen, who swore that it could be seen every year, and always in the same way. He also says that he recollects the same thing being affirmed in the islands of the Azores; and all these lands were described as in the same direction, and as being like each other, and of the same size. Having taken in water, wood, and meat, and all else that the men had who were left at Gomera by the Admiral when he went to the island of Canaria to repair the caravel Pinta, he finally made sail from the said island of Gomera, with his three caravels, on Thursday, the 6th day of September.11.
Thursday, 6th of September
He departed on that day from the port of Gomera in the morning, and shaped a course to go on his voyage ; having received tidings from a caravel that came from the island of Hierro that three Portuguese caravels were off that island with the object of taking him. (This must have been the result of the King’s annoyance that Colon should have gone to Castile.) There was a calm all that day and night, and in the morning he found himself between Gomera and Tenerife.12.
Friday, 7th of September
The calm continued all Friday and Saturday, until the third hour of the night.13.
Saturday, 8th of September
At the third hour of Saturday night it began to blow from the N.E., and the Admiral shaped a course to the west. He took in much set, over the bows, which retarded progress,
and 9 leagues were made in that day and night.
14.
Sunday, 9th of September
This day the Admiral made 19 leagues, and he arranged to reckon less than the number run, because if the voyage was of long duration, the people would not be so terrified and heartened. In the night he made 120 miles, at the rate of 12
miles an hour, which are 30 leagues. The sailors steered badly, letting the ship fall off to N.E., and even more, respecting which the Admiral complained many times.15.
Monday, 10th of September
In this day and night he made 60 leagues, at the rate of 10 miles an hour, which are 2 leagues; but he only counted 48 leagues, that the people might not be alarmed if the voyage should be long.16.
Tuesday, 11th of September
That day they sailed on their course, which was west, and made 20 leagues and more. They saw a large piece of the mast of a ship of 120 tons, but were unable to get it. In the night they made nearly 20 leagues, but only counted 16, for the reason already given.17.
Wednesday, 12th of September
That day, steering their course, they made 33 leagues during the day and night, counting less.18.
Thursday, 13th of September
That day and night, steering their course, which was west, they made 33 leagues, counting 3 or 4 less. The currents were against them. On this day, at the commencement of the night, the needles turned a half point to north-west, and in the morning they turned somewhat more north-west.19.
Friday, 14th of September
That day they navigated, on their westerly course, day and night, 20 leagues, counting a little less. Here those of the caravel Niña reported that they had seen a tern and a boatswain bird, and these birds never go more than 25 leagues from the land.20.
Saturday, 15th of September
That day and night they made 27 leagues and rather more on their west course ; and in the early part of the night there fell from heaven into, the sea a marvellous flame of fire, at a distance of- about 4 or 5 leagues from them.21.
Sunday, 16th of September
That day and night they steered their course west, making 39 leagues, but the Admiral only counted 36. There were some clouds and small rain. The Admiral says that on that day, and ever afterwards, they met with very temperate breezes, so that there was great pleasure in enjoying the mornings, nothing being wanted but the song of nightingales. He says that the weather was like April in Andalusia. Here they began to see many tufts of grass which were very green, and appeared to have been quite recently torn from the land. From this they judged that they were near some island, but not the main land, according to the Admiral, “because,” he says, ” I make the main land to be more distant.”22.
Monday, 17th of September
They proceeded on their west course, and made over 50 leagues in the day and night, but the Admiral only counted 47. They were aided by the current. They saw much very fine grass and herbs from rocks, which came from the west. They, therefore, considered that they were near land. The pilots observed the north point, and found that the needles turned a full point to the west of north. So the mariners were alarmed and dejected, and did not give their reason. But the Admiral knew, and ordered that the north should be again observed at dawn. They then found that the needles were true. The cause was that the star makes the movement, and not the needles. At dawn, on that Monday, they saw much more weed appearing, like herbs from rivers, in which they found a live crab, which the Admiral kept. He says that these crabs are certain signs of land. The sea-water was found to be less salt than it had been since leaving the Canaries. The breezes were always sof t. Every one was pleased, and the best sailers went ahead to sight the first land. They saw many tunnyfish, and the crew of the Niña killed one. The Admiral here says that these signs of land came from the west, “in which direction I trust in that high God in whose hands are all victories that very soon we shall sight land.” In that morning he says that a white bird was seen which has not the habit of sleeping on the sea, called rabo de junco (boatswain-bird).
23.
Tuesday, 18th of September
This day and night they made over 55 leagues, the Admiral only counting 48. In all these days the sea was very smooth, like the river at Seville. This day Martin Alonso, with the Pinta, which was a fast sailer, did not wait, for he said to the Admiral, from his caravel, that he had seen a great multitude of birds flying westward, that he hoped to see land that night, and that he therefore pressed onward. A great cloud appeared in the north, which is a sign of the proximity of land.24.
Wednesday, 19th of September
The Admiral continued on his course, and during the day and night he made but 25 leagues because it was calm. He counted 22. This day, at 10 o’clock, a booby came to the ship, and in the afternoon another arrived, these birds not generally going more than 20 leagues from the land. There was also some drizzling rain without wind, which is a sure sign of land. The Admiral did not wish to cause delay by beating to windward to ascertain whether land was near, but he considered it certain that there were islands both to the north and south of his position, (as indeed there were, and he was passing through the middle of them). For his desire was to press onwards to the Indies, the weather being fine. For on his return, God willing, he could see all. These are his own words. Here the pilots found their positions. He of the Niña made the Canaries 440 leagues distant, the Pinta 420. The pilot of the Admiral’s ship made the distance exactly 400 leagues.25.
Thursday, 20th of September
This day the course was W.b.N., and as her head was all round the compass owing to the calm that prevailed, the ship made only 7 or 8 leagues. Two boobies came to the ship, and afterwards another, a sign of the proximity of land. They saw much weed, although none was seen on the previous day. They caught a bird with the hand, which was like a tern. But it was a river-bird, not a sea-bird, the feet being like those of a gull. At dawn two or three land-birds came singing to the ship, and they disappeared before sunset. Afterwards a booby came from W.N.W., and flew to the S.W., which was a sign that it left land in the W.N.W. ; for these birds sleep on shore, and go to sea in the mornings in search of food, not extending their flight more than 20 leagues from the land.
26.
Friday, 21st of September
Most of the day it was calm, and later there was a little wind. During the day and night they did not make good more than 13 leagues. At dawn they saw so much weed that the sea appeared to be covered with it, and it came from the west. A booby was seen. The sea was very smooth, like a river, and the air the best in the world. They saw a whale, which is a sign that they were near land, because they always keep near the shore.27.
Saturday, 22nd of September
They shaped a course W.N.W. more or less, her head turning from one to the other point, and made 30 leagues. Scarcely any weed was seen. They saw some sandpipers and another bird. Here the Admiral says : “This contrary wind was very necessary for me, because my people were much excited at the thought that in these seas no wind ever blew in the direction of Spain.” Part of the day there was no weed, and later it was very thick.28.
Sunday, 23rd of September
They shaped a course N.W., and at times more northerly; occasionally they were on their course, which was west, and they made about 22 leagues. They saw a dove and a booby, another river-bird, and some white birds: There was a great deal of weed, and they found crabs in it. The sea being smooth and calm, the crew began to murmur, saying that here there was no great sea, and that the wind would never blow so that they could return to Spain. Afterwards the sea rose very much, without wind, which astonished them. The Admiral here says: ” Thus the high sea was very necessary to me, such as had not appeared but in the time of the Jews when they went out of Egypt and murmured against Moses, who delivered them out of captivity.”
29.
Monday, 24th of September
The Admiral went on his west course all day and night, making 14 leagues. He counted 12. A booby came to the ship, and many sandpipers.30.
Tuesday, 25th of September
This day began with a calm, and afterwards there was wind. They were on their west course until night: The Admiral conversed with Martin Alonso Pinzon, captain of the other caravel Pinta, respecting a chart which he had sent to the caravel three days before, on which, as it would appear, the Admiral had certain islands depicted in that sea. Martin Alonso said that the ships were in the position on which the islands were placed, and the Admiral replied that so it appeared to him: but it might be that they had not fallen in with them, owing to the currents which had always set the ships to the N.E., and that they had not made so much as the pilots reported. The Admiral then asked for the chart to be returned,
and it was sent back on a line. The Admiral then began to
plot the position on it, with the pilot and mariners. At sunset Martin Alonso went up on the poop of his ship, and with much joy called to the Admiral, claiming the reward as he had sighted land. When the Admiral heard this positively declared, he says that he gave thanks to the Lord on his knees, while Martin Alonso said the Gloria in excelsis with his people. The Admiral’s crew did the same. Those of the Niña all went up on the mast and into the rigging, and declared that it was land. It so seemed to the Admiral, and that it was distant 25 leagues. They all continued to declare it was land until night. The Admiral ordered the course to be altered from W. to S.W., in which direction the land had appeared. That day they made 4 leagues on a west course, and 17 S.W. during the night, in all 21; but the people were told that 13 was the distance made good; for it was always feigned to them that the distances were less, so that the voyage might not appear so long. Thus two reckonings were kept on this voyage, the shorter being feigned, and the longer being the true one. The sea was very smooth, so that many sailors bathed alongside. They saw many dorados and other fish.31.
Wednesday, 26th of September
The Admiral continued on the west course until afternoon. Then he altered course to S. W., until he made out that what had been said to be land was only clouds. Day and night they made 31 leagues, counting 24 for the people. The sea was like a river, the air pleasant and very mild.32.
Thursday, 27th of September
The course west, and distance made good during day and night 24 leagues, 20 being counted for the people. Many dorados came. One was killed. A boatswain-bird came.33.
Friday, 28th of September
The course was west, and the distance, owing to calms, only 14 leagues in day and night, 13 leagues being counted. They met with little weed; but caught two dorados, and more in the other ships. 34.
Saturday, 29th of September
The course was west, and they made 24 leagues, counting 21 for the people. Owing to calms, the distance made good during day and night was not much. They saw a bird called rabi forcado (man-o’-war bird), which makes the boobies vomit what they have swallowed, and eats it, maintaining itself on nothing else. It is a sea-bird, but does not sleep on the sea, and does not go more than 20 leagues from the land. There are many of them at the Cape Verde Islands. Afterwards they saw two boobies. The air was very mild and agreeable, and the Admiral says that nothing was wanting but to hear the nightingale. The sea smooth as a river. Later, three boobies and a man-o’-war bird were seen three times. There was much weed.35.
Sunday, 30th of September
The western course was steered, and during the day and night, owing to calms, only 14 leagues were made, 11 being counted. Four boatswain-birds came to the ship, which is a great sign of land, for so many birds of this kind together is a sign that they are not straying or lost. They also twice saw four boobies. There was much weed. Note that the stars which are called Las Guardias (the Pointers) when night comes on, are near the western point, and when dawn breaks they are near the N.E. point; so that, during the whole night, they do not appear to move more than three lines or 9 hours, and this on each night. The Admiral says this, and also that at nightfall the needles vary a point westerly, while at dawn they agree exactly with the star. From this it would appear that the north star has a movement like the other stars, while the needles always point correctly.36.
Monday, lst of October
Course west, and 25 leagues made good, counted for the crew as 20 leagues. There was a heavy shower of rain. At dawn the Admiral’s pilot made the distance from Hierro 578 leagues to the west: The reduced reckoning which the Admiral showed to the crew made it 584 leagues; but the truth which the Admiral observed and kept secret was 707.37.
Tuesday, 2nd of October
Course west, and during the day and night 39 leagues were made good, counted for the crew as 30. The sea always smooth. Many thanks be given to God, says the Admiral, that the weed is coming from east to west, contrary to its usual course. Many fish were seen, and one was killed. A white bird was also seen that appeared to be a gull.38.
Wednesday, 3rd of October
They navigated on the usual course, and made good 47 leagues, counted as 40. Sandpipers appeared, and much weed, some of it very old and some quite fresh and having fruit. They saw no birds. The Admiral, therefore, thought that they had left the islands behind them which were depicted on the charts. The Admiral here says that he did not wish to keep the ships beating about during the last week, and in the last few days when there were so many signs of land, although he had information of certain islands in this region. For he wished to avoid delay, his object being to reach the Indies. He says that to delay would not be wise.39.
Thursday, 4th of October
Course west, and 63 leagues made good during the day and night, counted as 46. More than forty sandpipers came to the ship in a flock; and two boobies, and a ship’s boy hit one with a stone. There also came a man-o’-war bird and a white bird like a gull.40.
Friday, 5th of October
The Admiral steered his course, going 11 miles an hour, and during the day and night they made good 57 leagues, as the wind increased somewhat during the night : 45 were counted. The sea was smooth and quiet. “To God,” he says, “be many thanks given, the air being pleasant and temperate, with no weed, many sandpipers, and flying-fish coming on the deck
in numbers.”41.
Saturday, 6th of October
The Admiral continued his west course, and during day and night they made good 40 leagues, 33 being counted. This night Martin Alonso said that it would be well to steer south of west, and it appeared to the Admiral that Martin Alonso did not say this with respect to the island of Cipango. He saw that if an error was made the land would not be reached so quickly, and that consequently it would be better to go at once to the continent and afterwards to the islands.42.
Sunday, 7th of October
The west course was continued; for two hours they went at the rate of 12 miles an hour, and afterwards 8 miles an hour. They made good 23 leagues, counting 18 for the people. This day, at sunrise, the caravel Niña, which went ahead, being the best sailer, and pushed forward as much as possible to sight the land first, so as to enjoy the reward which the Sovereigns had promised to whoever should see it first, hoisted a flag at the mast-head and fired a gun, as a signal that she had sighted land, for such was the Admiral’s order. He had also ordered that, at sunrise and sunset, all the ships should join him; because those two times are most proper for seeing the greatest distance, the haze clearing away. No land was seen during the afternoon, as reported by the caravel Niña, and they passed a great number of birds flying from N. to S.W. This gave rise to the belief that the birds were either going to sleep on land, or were flying from the winter which might be supposed to be near in the land whence they were coming. The Admiral was aware that most of the islands held by the Portuguese were discovered by the flight of birds. For this reason he resolved to give up the west course, and to shape a course W.S.W. for the two following days. He began the new course one hour before sunset. They made good, during the night, about 5 leagues, and 23 in the day, altogether 28 leagues.43.
Monday, 8th of October
The course was W.S.W., and 11 or 12 leagues were made good in the day and night ; and at tunes it appears that they went at the rate of 15 miles an hour during the night (if the handwriting is not deceptive). The sea was like the river at Seville. “Thanks be to God,” says the Admiral, “the air is very soft like the April at Seville; and it is a pleasure to be here, so balmy are the breezes.” The weed seemed to be very fresh. There were many land-birds, and they took one that was flying to the S.W. Terns, ducks, and a booby were also seen. 44.
Tuesday, 9th of October
The course was S.W., and they made 5 leagues. The wind then changed, and the Admiral steered W. by N. 4 leagues. Altogether, in day and night, they made 11 leagues by day and 20 leagues by night; counted as 17 leagues altogether. Throughout the night birds were heard passing.45.
Wednesday. 10th of October
The course was W.S.W., and they went at the rate of 10 miles an hour, occasionally 12 miles, and sometimes 7. During the day and night they made 59 leagues, counted as no more than 44. Here the people could endure no longer. They complained of the length of the voyage. But the Admiral cheered them up in the best way he could, giving them good hopes of the advantages they might gain from it. He added that, however much they might complain, he had to go to the Indies, and that he would go on until he found them, with the help of our Lord.46.
Thursday, 11th of October
The course was W.S.W., and there was more sea than there had been during the whole of the voyage. They saw sand pipers, and a green reed near the ship. Those of the caravel Pinta saw a cane and a pole, and they took up another small pole which appeared to have been worked with iron; also another bit of cane, a land-plant, and a small board. The crew of the caravel Niña also saw signs of land, and a small branch covered with berries. Every one breathed afresh and rejoiced at these signs. The run until sunset was 27 leagues.
47.
After sunset the Admiral returned to his original west course, and they went along at the rate of 12 miles an hour. Up to two hours after midnight they had gone 90 miles, equal to 22 leagues. As the caravel Pinta was a better sailer, and went ahead of the Admiral, she found the land, and made the signals ordered by the Admiral. The land was first seen by a sailor named Rodrigo de Triana. But the Admiral, at ten o’clock, being on the castle of the poop, saw a light, though it was so uncertain that he could not affirm it was land. He called Pero Gutierrez, a gentleman of the King’s bed-chamber, and said that there seemed to be a light, and that he should look at it. He did so, and saw it. The Admiral said the same to Rodrigo Sanchez of Segovia, whom the King and Queen had sent with the fleet as inspector, but he could see nothing, because he was not in a place whence anything could be seen. After the Admiral had spoken he saw the light once or twice, and it was like a wax candle rising and falling.48.
It seemed to few to be an indication of land; but the Admiral made certain that land was close. When they said the Salve, which all the sailors were accustomed to sing in their way, the Admiral asked and admonished the men to keep a good look-out on the forecastle, and to watch well for land; Land to him who should first cry out that he saw land, he would give a silk doublet, besides the other rewards promised by the Sovereigns, which were 10,000 maravedis to him who should first see it. At two hours after midnight the land was sighted at a distance of
two leagues. They shortened sail, and lay by under the mainsail without the bonnets.49.
Friday, 12th of October
The vessels were hove to, waiting for daylight; and on Friday they arrived at a small island of the Lucayos, called in the language of the Indians, Guanahani. Presently they saw naked people.
The Admiral went on shore in the armed boat, and Martin Alonso Pinzon, and Vicente Yanez, his brother, who was captain of the Niña. The Admiral took the royal standard, and the captains went with two banners of the green cross, which the Admiral took in all the ships as a sign with an F anda Y and a crown over each letter, one on one side of the cross and the other on the other. Having landed they saw trees very green, and much water, and
fruits of diverse kinds. The Admiral called to the two captains, and to the others who leaped on shore, and to Rodrigo Escovedo, secretary of the whole fleet, and to Rodrigo Sanchez of Segovia, and said that they should bear faithful testimony that he, in presence of all, had taken, as he now took, possession of the
said island for the King and for the Queen his Lords, making the declarations that are required, as is now largely set forth in the testimonies which were then made in writing.50.
Presently many inhabitants of the island assembled. What follows is in the actual words of the Admiral in his book of the first navigation and discovery of the Indies. “I,” he says, “that we might form great friendship, for I knew that they were a people who could be more easily freed and converted to our holy
faith by love than by force, gave to some of them red caps, and glass beads to put round their necks, and many other things of little value, which gave them great pleasure, and made them so much our friends that it was a marvel to see. They afterwards came to the ship’s boats where we were, swimming and bringing us parrots, cotton threads in skeins, darts, and many other things; and we exchanged them for other things that we gave them, such as glass beads and small bells. In fine, they took all, and gave what they had with good will. It appeared to me to be a race of people very poor in everything. They go as naked as when their mothers bore them, and so do the women, although I did not see more than one young girl. All I saw were youths, none more than thirty years of age. They are very well made with very handsome bodies, and very good countenances. Their hair is short and coarse, almost like the hairs of a horsetail. They wear the hairs brought down to the eyebrows except a few locks behind, which they wear long and never cut. They paint themselves black, and they are the color of the Canarians, neither black nor white. Some paint themselves white, others red, and others of what color they find. Some paint their faces, others the whole body, some only round the eyes, others only on the nose. They neither care nor know anything of arms, for I showed them swords, and they took them by the blade and cut themselves through ignorance. They have no iron, their darts being wands witout iron, some of them having a fish’s tooth at the end, and others being pointed in various ways. They are all of fair stature and size, with good faces, and well made. I saw some with marks of wounds on their bodies, and I made signs to ask what it was, and they gave me to understand that people from other adjacent islands came with the intention of seeing them, and that they defended themselves. I believe and still believe, that they come here from the mainland to take them prisoners. They should be good servants and intelligent, for I observed that they quickly took in what was said to them, and I believe that they would easily be made Christians, as it
appeared to me that they had no religion. I, our Lord being pleased, will take hence, at the time of my departure, six natives for your Highnesses, that they may learn to speak. I saw no beast of any kind except parrots, on this island.” The above is in the words of the Admiral.51.
Saturday, 13th of October
“As soon as dawn broke many of these people came to the
beach, all youths, as I have said, and all of good stature, a
very handsome people. Their hair is not curly, but loose and
coarse, like horse hair. In all the forehead is broad, more so
than in any other people I have hitherto seen. Their eyes are
very beautiful and not small, and themselves far from black, but
the color of the Canarians. Nor shouldanything else be expected,
as this island is in a line east and west from the island of Hierro
in the Canaries. Their legs are very straight, all in one line,
and no belly, but very well formed. They came to the ship in
small canoes, made out of the trunk of a tree like a long boat,
and all of one piece, and wonderfully worked, considering the
country. They are large, some of them holding 40 to 45 men, others
smaller, and some only large enough to hold one man. They are
propelled with a paddle like a baker’s shovel, and go at a marvelous
rate. If the canoe capsizes, they all promptly begin to swim,
and to bale it out with calabashes that they take with them.
They brought skeins of cotton thread, parrots, darts, and other
small things which it would be tedious to recount, and they give
all in exchange for anything that may be given to them. I was
attentive, and took trouble to ascertain if there was gold. I
saw that some of them had a small piece fastened in a hole they
have in the nose, and by signs I was able to make out that to
the south, or going from the island to the south, there was a
king who had great cups full, and who possessed a great quantity.
I tried to get them to go there, but afterwards I sawthat they
had no inclination. I resolved to wait until to-morrow in the
afternoon and then to depart, shaping a course to the S.W., for,according
to what many of them told me, there was land to the S., to the
S.W., and N.W., and that the natives from the N.W. often came
to attack them, and went on to the S.W. in search of gold and
precious stones.52.
“This island is rather large and very flat, with bright
green trees, much water, and a very large lake in the centre,
without any mountain, and the whole land so green that it is a
pleasure to look on it. The people are very docile, and for the
longing to possess our things, and not having anything to give
in return, they take what they can get, and presently swim away.
Still, they give away all they have got, for whatever may be
given to them, down to broken bits of crockery and glass. I saw
one give 16 skeins of cotton for three ceotis1 of Portugal, equal
to one blanca of Spain, the skeins being as much as an arroba
of cotton thread. I shall keep it, and shall allow no one to
take it, preserving it all for your Highnesses, for it may be
obtained in abundance. It is grown in this island, though the
short time did not admit of my ascertaining this for a certainty.
Here also is found the gold they wear fastened in their noses.
But, in order not to lose time, I intend to go and see if I can
find the island of Cipango. Now,as it is night, all the natives
have gone on shore with their canoes.”53.
Sunday, 14th of October
“At dawn I ordered the ship’s boat and the boats of the
caravels to begot ready, and I went along the coast of the island
to the N.N.E., to see the other side, which was on the other side
to the east, and also to see the villages. Presently I saw two
or three, and the people all came to the shore, calling out and
giving thanks to God. Some of them brought us water, others came
with food, and when they saw that I did not want to land, they
got into the sea, and came swimming to us. We understood that
they asked us if we had come from heaven. One old man came into
the boat, and others cried out, in loud voices, to all the men
and women, to come and see the men who had come from heaven, and
to bring them to eat and drink. Many came, including women, each
bringing something, giving thanks to God, throwing themselves
on the ground and shouting to us to come on shore. But I was
afraid to land, seeing an extensive reef of rocks which surrounded
the island, with deep water between it and the shore forming a
port large enough for as many ships as there are in Christendom,
but with a very narrow entrance. It is true that within this
reef there are some sunken rocks, but the sea has no more motion
than the water in a well. In order to see all this I went this
morning, that I might be able to give a full account to your Highnesses,
and also where a fortress might be established. I saw a piece
of land which appeared like an island, although it is not one,
and on it there were six houses. It might be converted into an
island in two days, though I do not see that it would be necessary,
for these people are very simple as regards the use of arms, as
your Highnesses will see from the seven that I caused to be taken,
to bring home and learn our language and return; unless your Highnesses
should order them all to be brought to Castile, or to be kept
as captives on the same island; for with fifty men they can all
be subjugated and made to do what is required of them. Close
to the above peninsula there are gardens of the most beautiful
trees I ever saw, and with leaves as green as those of Castile
in the month of April and May, and much water. I examined all
that port, and afterwards I returned to the ship and made sail.
I saw so many islands that I hardly knew how to determine to
which I should go first. Those natives I had with me said, by
signs, that there were so many that they could not be numbered,
and they gave the names of more than a hundred. At last I looked
out for the largest, and resolved to shape a course for it, and
so I did. It will be distant five leagues from this of San Salvador,
and the others some more, some less. All are very flat, and all
are inhabited. The natives make war on each other, although these
are very simple-minded and handsomely-formed people.”54.
Monday, 15th of October
“I had laid by during the night, with the fear of reaching
the land to anchor before daylight, not knowing whether the coast
was clear of rocks, and at dawn I made sail. As the island was
more than 5 leagues distant and nearer 7, and the tide checked
my way, it was noon when we arrived at the said island. I found
that side facing towards the island of San Salvador tended north
and south with a length of 5 leagues, and the other which I followed
ran east and west for more than 10 leagues. As from this island
I saw another larger one to the west, I clued up the sails, after
having run all that day until night, otherwise I could not have
reached the western cape. I gave the name of Santa Maria de la
Conception to the island, and almost as the sun set I anchored
near the said cape to ascertain if it containedgold. For the
people I had taken from the island of San Salvador told me that
here they wore very large rings of gold on their arms and legs.
I really believed that all they said was nonsense, invented that
they might escape. My desire was not to pass any island without
taking possession, so that, one having been taken, the same may
be said of all. I anchored, and remained until to-day, Tuesday,
when I went to the shore with the boats armed, and landed. The
people, who were numerous, went naked, and were like those of
the other island of San Salvador. They let us go over the island,
and gave us what we required. As the wind changed to the S.E.,
I did not like to stay, and returned to the ship. A large canoe
was alongside the Niña, and one of the men of the island of San
Salvador, who was on board jumped into the sea and got into the
canoe. In the middle of the night before, another swam away behind
the canoe, which fled, for there never was boat that could have
overtaken her, seeing that in speed they have a great advantage.
So they reached the land and left the canoe. Some of my people
went on shore in chase of them, but they all fled like fowls and
the canoe they had left was brought alongside the caravel Niña,whither,
from another direction, another small canoe came, with a man who
wished to barter with skeins of cotton. Some sailors jumped into
the sea, because he would not come on board the caravel, and seized
him. I was on the poop of my ship, and saw everything. So I
sent for the man, gave him a red cap, some small beads of green
glass, which I put on his arms, and small bells, which I put in
his ears, and ordered his canoe, which was also on board, to be
returned to him. I sent him on shore, and presently made sail
to go to the other large island which was in sight to the westward.
I also ordered the other large canoe, which the caravel Niña
was towing astern, to be cast adrift; and I soon saw that it reached
the land at the same time as the man to whom I had given the above
things. I had not wished to take the skein of cotton that he
offered me. All the others came round him and seemed astonished,
for it appeared clear to them that we were good people. The other
man who had fled might do us some harm because we had carried
him off, and for that reason I ordered this man to be set free
and gave him the above things, that he might think well of us,
otherwise, when your Highnesses again send an expedition, they
might not be friendly. All the presents I gave were not worth
four maravedis. At 10 we departed with the wind S.W., and made
for the south, to reach that other island, which is very large,
and respecting which all the men that I bring from San Salvador
make signs that there is much gold, andthat they wear it as bracelets
on the arms, on the legs, in the ears and nose, and round the
neck. The distance of this island from that of Santa Maria is
9 leagues on a course east to west. All this part of the island
trends N.W. and S.E., and it appeared that this coast must have
a length of 28 leagues. It is very flat, without any mountain,
like San Salvador and Santa Maria, all being beach without rocks,
except that there are some sunken rocks near the land, whence
it is necessary to keep a good lookout when it is desired to anchor,
and not to come to very near the land; but the water is always
very clear, and the bottom is visible. At a distance of two shots
of a lombard, there is, off all these islands, such a depth that
the bottom cannot be reached. These islands are very green and
fertile, the climate very mild. They may contain many things
of which I have no knowledge, for I do not wish to stop, in discovering
and visiting many islands, to find gold. These people make signs
that it is worn on the arms and legs; and it must be gold, for
they point to some pieces that I have. I cannot err, with the
help of our Lord, in finding out where this gold has its origin.
Being in the middle of the channel between these two islands,
that is to say, that of Santa Maria and this large one, to which
I give the name of Fernandina, Icame upon a man alone in a canoe
going from Santa Maria to Fernandina. He had a little of their
bread, about the size of a fist, a calabash of water, a piece
of brown earth powdered and then kneaded, and some dried leaves,
which must be a thing highly valued by them, for they bartered
with it at San Salvador. He also had with him a native basket
with a string of glass beads, and two blancas, by which I knew
that he had come from the island of San Salvador, and had been
to Santa Maria, and thence to Fernandina. He came alongside the
ship, and I made him come on board as he desired, also getting
the canoe inboard, and taking care of all his property. I ordered
him to be given to eat bread and treacle, and also to drink:
and so I shall take him on to Fernandina, where I shall return
everything to him, in order that he may give a good account of
us, that, our Lord pleasing, when your Highnesses shall send here,
those who come may receive honor, and that the natives may give
them all they require.”55.
Tuesday, 16th of October
“I sailed from the island of Santa Maria de la Conception
at about noon, to go to Fernandina Island, which appeared very
large to the westward, and I navigated all that day with light
winds. I could not arrive in time to be able to see the bottom,
so as to drop the anchor on a clear place, for it is necessary
to be very careful not to lose the anchors. So I stood off and
on all that night until day, when I came to an inhabited place
where I anchored, and whence that man had come that I found yesterday
in the canoe in mid channel. He had given such a good report
of us that there was no want of canoes alongside the ship all
that night, which brought us water and what they had to offer.
I ordered each one to be given something, such as a few beads,
ten or twelve of those made of glass on a thread, some timbrels
made of brass such as are worth a maravedi in Spain, and some
straps, all which they looked upon as most excellent. I also
ordered them to be given treacle to eat when they came on board.
At three o’clock I sent the ship’s boat on shore for water,
and the natives with good will showed my people where the water
was, and they themselves brought the full casks down to the boat
and did all they could to please us.56.
“This island is very large, and I have determined to sail
round it, because, so far as I can understand, there is a mine
in or near it. The island is eight leagues from Santa Maria,
nearly east and west; and this point I had reached, as well as
all the coast, trends N.N.W. and S.S.E. I saw at least 20 leagues
of it, and then it had not ended. Now, as I am writing this,
I made sail with the wind at the south, to sail round the island,
and to navigate until I find Samaot, which is the island or city
where there is gold, as all the natives say who are on board,
and as those of San Salvador and Santa Maria told us. These people
resemble those of the said islands, with the same language and
customs, except that these appear to me a rather more domestic
and tractable people, yet also more subtle. For I observed that
those who brought cotton and other trifles to the ship, knew better
than the others how to make a bargain. In this island I saw cotton
cloths made like mantles. The people were better disposed, and
the women wore in front of their bodies a small piece of cotton
which scarcely covered them.57.
“It is a very green island, level and very fertile, and
I have no doubt that they sow and gather corn all the year round,
as well as other things. I saw many trees very unlike those of
our country. Many of them have their branches growing in different
ways and all from one trunk, and one twig is one form, and another
in a different shape, and so unlike that it is the greatest wonder
in the world to see the great diversity; thus one branch has leaves
like those of a cane, and others like those of a mastick tree:
and on a single tree there are five or six different kinds.
Nor are these grafted, for it may be said that grafting is unknown,
the trees being wild, and untended by these people. They do not
know any religion, and I believe they could easily be converted
to Christianity, for they are very intelligent. Here the fish
are so unlike ours that it is wonderful. Some are the shape of
dories, and of the finest colors in the world, blue, yellow, red,
and other tints, all painted in various ways, and the colors are
so bright that there is not a man who would not be astonished,
and would not take great delight in seeing them. There are also
whales. I saw no beasts on the land of any kind, except parrots
and lizards. A boy told me that he saw a large serpent. I saw
neither sheep, nor goats, nor any other quadruped. It is true
I have been here a short time, since noon, yet I could not have
failed to see some if there had been any. I will write respecting
the circuit of this island after I have been round it.”58.
Wednesday, 17th of October
“At noon I departed from the village off which I was
anchored, and where I took in water, to sail round this island
of Fernandina. The wind was S.W. and South. My wish was to follow
the coast of this island to the S.E., from where I was, the whole
coast tending N.N.W. and S.S.E.; because all the Indians I bring
with me, and others, made signs to this southern quarter, as the
direction of the island they call Samoet, where the gold is.
Martin Alonso Pinzon, captain of the caravel Pinta, on board of
which I had three of the Indians, came to me and said that one
of them had given him to understand very positively that the island
might be sailed round much quicker by shaping a N.N.W. course.
I saw that the wind would not help me to take the course I desired,
and that it was fair for the other, so I made sail to the N.N.W.
When I was two leagues from the cape of the island, I discovered
a very wonderful harbor. It has one mouth, or, rather, it may
be said to have two, for there is an islet in the middle. Both
are very narrow, and within it is wide enough for a hundred ships,
if there was depth and a clean bottom, and the entrance was deep
enough. It seemed desirable to explore it and take soundings,
so I anchored outside, and went in with all the ship’s boats,
when we saw there was insufficient depth. As I thought, when
I first saw it, that it was the mouth of some river, I ordered
the water-casks to be brought. On shore I found eight or ten
men, who presently came to us and showed us the village, whither
I sent the people for water, some with arms, and others with the
casks; and, as it was some little distance, I waited two hours
for them.59.
“During that time I walked among the trees, which was the
most beautiful thing I had ever seen, beholding as much verdure
as in the month of May in Andalusia. The trees are as unlike
ours as night from day, as are the fruits, the herbs, the stones,
and everything. It is true that some of the trees bore some resemblance
to those in Castile, but most of them are very different, and
some were so unlike that no one could compare them to anything
in Castile. The people were all like those already mentioned:
like them naked, and the same size. They give what they possess
in exchange for anything that may be given to them. I here saw
some of the ship’s boys bartering broken bits of glass and crockery
for darts. The men who went for water told me that they had been
in the houses of the natives, and that they were very plain and
clean inside. Their beds and bags for holding things were like
nets of cotton. The houses are like booths, and very high, with
good chimneys. But, among many villages that I saw, there was
none that consisted of more than from twelve to fifteen houses.
Here they found that the married women wore clouts of cotton,
but not the young girls, except a few who were over eighteen years
of age. They had dogs, mastiffs, and hounds; and here they found
a man who had a piece of gold in his nose, the size of half a
castellano, on which they saw letters. I quarrelled with these
people because they would not exchange or give what was required;
as I wished to see what and whose this money was; and they replied
that they were not accustomed to barter.60.
“After the water was taken I returned to the ship, made
sail, and shaped a course N.W., until I had discovered all the
part of the coast of the island which trends east to west. Then
all the Indians turned round and said that this island was smaller
than Samoet, and that it would be well to return back so as to
reach it sooner. The wind presently went down and then sprang
up from W.N.W., which was contrary for us to continue on the previous
course. So I turned back, and navigated all that night to E.S.E.,
sometimes to east and to S.E. This course was steered to keep
me clear of the land for there were very heavy clouds and thick
weather, which did not admit of my approaching the land to anchor.
On that night it rained very heavily from midnight until nearly
dawn, and even afterwards the clouds threatened rain. We found
ourselves at the S.W. end of the island, where I hoped to anchor
until it cleared up, so as to see the other island whither I have
to go. On all these days, since I arrived in these Indies, it
has rained more or less. Your Highnesses may believe that this
land is the best and most fertile, and with a good climate, level,
and as good as therei s in the world.”61.
Thursday, 18th of October
“After it had cleared up I went before the wind, approaching
the island as near as I could, and anchored when it was no longer
light enough to keep under sail. But I did not go on shore, and
made sail at dawn. . . .”62.
Friday, 19th of October
“I weighed the anchors at daylight, sending the caravel
Pinta on an E.S.E. course, the caravel Niña S.S.E., while I shaped
a S.E. course, giving orders that these courses were to be steered
until noon, and that then the two caravels should alter course
so as to join companywith me. Before we had sailed for three
hours we saw an island to the east, for which we steered, and
all three vessels arrived at the north point before noon. Here
there is an islet, and a reef of rocks to seaward of it, besides
one between the islet and the large island. The men of San Salvador,
whom I bring with me, called it Saomete, and I gave it the name
of Isabella. The wind was north, and the said islet bore from
the island of Fernandina, whence I had taken my departure, east
and west. Afterwards we ran along the coast of the island, westward
from the islet, and found its length to be 12 leagues as far as
a cape, which I named Cabo Hermoso, at the western end. The island
is beautiful, and the coast very deep, without sunken rocks off
it. Outside the shore is rocky, but further in there is a sandy
beach, and here I anchored on that Friday night until morning.
This coast and the part of the island I saw is almost flat, and
the island is very beautiful; for if the other islands are lovely,
this is more so. It has many very green trees, which are very
large. The land is higher than in the other islands, and in it
there are some hills, which cannot be called mountains; and it
appears that there is much water inland. From this point to the
N.E. the coast makes a great angle, and there are many thick and
extensive groves. I wanted to go and anchor there, so as to go
on shore and see so much beauty; but the water was shallow, and
we could only anchor at a distance from the land. The wind also
was fair for going to this cape, where I am now anchored, to which
I gave the name of Cabo Hermoso, because it is so. Thus it was
that I do not anchor in that angle, but as I saw this cape so
green and so beautiful, like all the other lands of these islands,
I scarcely knew which to visit first; for I can never tire my
eyes in looking at such lovely vegetation, so different from ours.
I believe that there are many herbs and many trees that are worth
much in Europe for dyes and for medicines; but I do not know them,
and this causes me great sorrow. Arriving at this cape, I found
the smell of the trees and flowers so delicious that it seemed
the pleasantest thing in the world. To-morrow, before I leave
this place, I shall go on shore to see what there is at this cape.
There are no people, but there are villages in the interior,
where, the Indians I bring with me say, there is a king who has
much gold. To-morrow I intend to go so far inland as to find
the village, and see and have some speech with this king, who,
according to the signs they make, rules over all the neighboring
islands, goes about clothed, and wears much gold on his person.
I do not give much faith to what they say, as well because I
do not understand them well as because they are so poor in gold
that even a little that this king may have would appear much to
them. This cape, to which I have given the name of Cabo Fermoso,
is, I believe, on an island separated from Saometo, and there
is another small islet between them. I did not try to examine
them in detail, because it could not be done in 50 years. For
my desire is to see and discover as much as I can before returning
to your Highnesses, our Lord willing, in April. It is true that
in the event of finding places where there is gold or spices in
quantity I should stop until I had collected as much as I could.
I, therefore, proceed in the hope of coming across such places.”63.
Saturday, 20th of October
“To-day, at sunrise, I weighed the anchors from where
I was with the ship, and anchored off the S.W. point of the island
of Saometo, to which I gave the name of Cabo de la Laguna, and
to the island Isabella. My intention was to navigate to the north-east
and east from the south-east and south, where, I understood from
the Indians I brought with me, was the village of the king. I
found the sea so shallow that I could not enter nor navigate in
it, and I saw that to follow a route by the south-east would be
a great round. So I determined to return by the route that I
had taken from the N.N.E. to the western part, and to sail round
this island to [reconnoitre it].64.
“I had so little wind that I never could sail along the
coast, except during the night. As it was dangerous to anchor
off these islands except in the day, when one can see where to
let go the anchor, for the bottom is all in patches, some clear
and some rocky, I lay to all this Sunday night. The caravels
anchored because they found themselves near the shore, and they
thought that, owing to the signals that they were in the habit
of making, I would come to anchor, but I did not wish to do so.”65.
Sunday, 21st of October
“At ten o’clock I arrived here, off this islet, and anchored,
as well as the caravels. After breakfast I went on shore, and
found only one house, in which there was no one, and I supposed
they had fled from fear, because all their property was left in
the house. I would notallow anything to be touched, but set out
with the captains and people to explore the island. If the others
already seen are very beautiful, green, and fertile, this is much
more so, with large trees and very green. Here there are large
lagoons with wonderful vegetation on their banks. Throughout
the island all is green, and the herbage like April in Andalusia.
The songs of the birds were so pleasant that it seemed as if
a man could never wish to leave the place. The flocks of parrots
concealed the sun; and the birds were so numerous, and of so many
different kinds, that it was wonderful. There are trees of a
thousand sorts, and all have their several fruits; and I feel
the most unhappy man in the world not to know them, for I am well
assured that they are all valuable. I bring home specimens of
them, and also of the land. Thus walking along round one of the
lakes I saw a serpent, which we killed, and I bring home the skin
for your Highnesses. As soon as it saw us it went into the lagoon,
and we followed, as the water was not very deep, until we killed
it with lances. It is 7 spans long, and I believe that there
are many like it in these lagoons. Here I came upon some aloes,
and I have determined to take ten quintals on board to-morrow,
for they tell me that they are worth a good deal. Also, while
in search of good water, we came to a village about half a league
from our anchorage. The people, as soon as they heard us, all
fled and left their houses, hiding their property in the wood.
I would not allow a thing to be touched, even the value of a
pin. Presently some men among them came to us, and one came quite
close. I gave him some bells and glass beads, which made him
very content and happy. That our friendship might be further
increased, I resolved to ask him for something; I requested him
to get some water. After I had gone on board, the natives came
to the beach with calabashes full of water, and they delighted
much in giving it to us. I ordered another string of glass beads
to be presented to them, and they said they would come again to-morrow.
I wished to fill up all the ships with water at this place, and,
if there should be time, I intended to search the island until
I had had speech with the king, and seen whether he had the gold
of which I had heard. I shall then shape a course for another
much larger island, which I believe to be Cipango, judging from
the signs made by the Indians I bring with me. They call it Cuba,
and they say that there are ships and many skilful sailors there.
Beyond this island there is another called Bosio, which they
also say is very large, and others we shall see as we pass, lying
between. According as I obtain tidings of gold or spices I shall
settle what should be done. I am still resolved to go to the
mainland and the city of Guisay, and to deliver the letters of
your Highnesses to the Gran Can, requesting a reply and returning
with it.”66.
Monday, 22nd of October
“All last night and to-day I was here, waiting to see
if the king or other person would bring gold or anything of value.
Many of these people came, like those of the other islands, equally
naked, and equally painted, some white, some red, some black,
and others in many ways. They brought darts and skeins of cotton
to barter, which they exchanged with the sailors for bits of glass,
broken crockery, and pieces of earthenware. Some of them had
pieces of gold fastened in their noses, which they willingly gave
for a hawk’s bell and glass beads. But there was so little that
it counts for nothing. It is true that they looked upon any little
thing that I gave them as a wonder, and they held our arrival
to be a great marvel, believing that we came from heaven. We
got water for the ships from a lagoon which is near the Cabo del
Isleo (Cape of the Islet), as we named it. In the said lagoon
Martin Alonso Pinzon, captain of the Pinta, killed another serpent
7 spans long, like the one we got yesterday. I made them gather
here as much of the aloe as they could find.”67.
Tuesday, 23rd of October
“I desired to set out to-day for the island of Cuba,
which I think must be Cipango, according to the signs these people
make, indicative of its size and riches, and I did not delay any
more here nor [attempt to sail] . . . round this island to the
residence of this king or lord, and have speech with him, as I
had intended. This would cause me much delay, and I see that
there is no gold mine here. To sail round would need several
winds, for it does not blow here as men may wish. It is better
to go where there is great entertainment, so I say that it is
not reasonable to wait, but rather to continue the voyage and
inspect much land, until some very profitable country is reached,
my belief being that it will be rich in spices. That I have no
personal knowledge of these products causes me the greatest sorrow
in the world, for I see a thousand kinds of trees, each one with
its own special fruit, all green now as in Spain during the months
of May and June, as well as a thousand kinds of herbs with their
flowers; yet I know none of them except this aloe, of which I
ordered a quantity to be brought on board to bring to your Highnesses.
I have not made sail for Cuba because there is no wind, but a
dead calm with much rain. It rained a great deal yesterday without
causing any cold. On the contrary, the days are hot and the nights
cool, like May in Andalusia.”68.
Wednesday, 24th of October
“At midnight I weighed the anchors and left the anchorage
at Cabo del Isleo, in the island of Isabella. From the northern
side, where I was, I intended to go to the island of Cuba, where
I heard of the people who were very great, and had gold, spices,
merchandise, and large ships. They showed me that the course
thither would be W.S.W., and so I hold. For I believe that it
si so, as all the Indians of these islands, as well as those I
brought with me in the ships, told me by signs. I cannot understand
their language, but I believe that it is of the island of Cipango
that they recount these wonders. On the spheres I saw, and on
the delineations of the map of the world, Cipango is in this
region. So I shaped a course W.S.W. until daylight, but at dawn
it fell calm and began to rain, and went on nearly all night.
I remained thus, with little wind, until the afternoon, when
it began to blow fresh. I set all the sails in the ship, the
mainsail with the two bonnets, the foresail, spritsail, mizzen,
main topsail, and the boat’s sail on the poop. So I proceeded
until nightfall, when the Cabo Verde of the island of Fernandina,
which is at the S.W. end, bore N.W. distant 7 leagues. As it
was now blowing hard, and I did not know how far it was to this
island of Cuba, I resolved not to go in search of it during the
night; all these islands being very steep-to, with no bottom round
them for a distance of two shots of a lombard. The bottom is
all is patches, one bit of sand and another of rock, and for this
reason it is not safe to anchor without inspection with the eye.
So I determined to take in all sails except the foresail, and
to go on under that reduced canvas. Soon the wind increased,
while the route was doubtful, and there was very thick weather,
with rain. I ordered the foresail to be furled, and we did not
make two leagues during that night.”69.
Thursday, 25th of October
“I steered W.S.W. from after sunset until 9 o’clock,
making 5 leagues. Afterwards I altered course to the west, and
went 8 miles an hour until one in the afternoon; and from that
time until three made good 44 miles. Then land was sighted, consisting
of 7 or 8 islands, the group running north and south, distant
from us 5 leagues.”70.
Friday, 26th of October
“The ship was on the south side of the islands, which
were all low, distant 5 or 6 leagues. I anchored there. The
Indians on board siad that thence to Cuba was a voyage in their
canoes of a day and a half; these being small dug-outs without
a sail. Such are their canoes. I departed thence for Cuba, for
by the signs the Indians made of its greatness, and of its gold
and pearls, I thought that it must be Cipango.”71.
Saturday, 27th of October
“I weighed from these islands at sunrise, and gave them
the name of Las Islas de Arena, owing to the little depth the
sea had for a distance of 6 leagues to the southward of them.
We went 8 miles an hour on a S.S.W. course until one o’clock,
having made 40 miles. Unitl night we had run 28 miles on the
same course, and before dark the land was sighted. At night there
was much rain. The vessels, on Saturday until sunset, made 17
leagues on a S.S.W. course.”72.
Sunday, 28th of October
“I went thence in search of the island of Cuba on a S.S.W.
course, making for the nearest point of it, and entered a very
beautiful river without danger of sunken rocks or other impediments.
All the coast was clear of dangers up to the shore. The mouth
of the river was 12 brazas across, and it is wide enough for a
vessel to beat in. I anchored about a lombard-shot inside.”
The Admiral says that “he never beheld such a beautiful
place, with trees bordering the river, handsome, green, and different
from ours, having fruits and flowers each one according to its
nature. There are many birds, which sing very sweetly. There
are a great number of palm trees of a different kind from those
in Guinea and from outs, of a middling height, the trunks without
that covering, adn the leaves very large, with which they thatch
their houses. The country is very level.” The Admiral jumped
into his boat and went on shore. He came to two houses, which
he believed to beong to fishermen who had fled from fear. In
one of them he found a kind of dog that never barks, and in both
there were nets of palm-fibre and cordage, as well as horn fish-hooks,
bone harpoons, and other apparatus “for fishing, and several
hearths. He believed that many people lived together in one house.
He gave orders that nothing in the houses should be touched,
and so it was done.” The herbage was as thick as in Andalusia
during April and May. He found much purslane and wild amaranth.
He returned to the boat and went up the river for some distance,
and he says it was great pleasure to see the bright verdure, and
the birds, which he could not leave to go back. He says that
this island is the most beautiful that eyes have seen, full of
good harbors and deep rivers, and the sea appeared as if it never
rose;for the herbage on the beach nearly reached the waves, which
does not happen where the sea is rough. (Up to that time they
had not experienced a rough sea among all those islands.) He
says that the island is full of very beautiful mountains, although
they are not very extensive as regards length, but high; and all
the country is high like Sicily. It is abundantly supplied with
water, as they gathered from the Indians they had taken with them
from the island of Guanahani. These said by signs that there
are ten great rivers, and that they cannot go round the island
in twenty days. When they came near land with the ships, two
canoes came out; and, when they saw the sailors get into a boat
and row about to find the depth of the river where they could
anchor, the canoes fled. The Indians say that in this island
there are gold mines and pearls, and the Admiral saw a likely
place for them and mussel-shells, which are signs of them. He
understood that large ships of the Gran Can came here, and that
from here to the mainland was a voyage of ten days. The Admiral
called this river and harbor San Salvador. 73.
Monday, 29th of October
The Admiral weighed anchor from this port and sailed to the
westward, to go to the city, where, as it seemed, the Indians
said that there was a king. They doubled a point six leagues
to the N.W., and then another point, then east ten leagues.
After another league he saw a river with no very large entrance,
to which he gave the name of Rio de la Luna. He went on until
the hour of vespers. He saw another river much larger than the
others, as the Indians told him by signs, and near he saw goodly
villages of houses. He called the river Rio de Mares. He sent
two boats on shore to a village to communicate, and one of the
Indians he had brought with him, for now they understood a little,
and show themselves content with Christians. All the men, women,
and children fled, abandoning their houses with all they contained.
The Admiral gave orders that nothing should be touched. The
houses were better than those he had seen before, and he believed
that the houses would improve as he approached the mainland.
They were made like booths, very large, and looking like tents
in a camp without regular streets, but one here and another there.
Within they were clean and well swept, with the furniture well
made. All are of palm branches beautifully constructed. They
found many images in the shape of women, and many heads like masks,
very well carved. It was not known whether these were used as
ornaments, or to be worshipped. They had dogs which never bark,
and wild birds tamed in their houses. There was a wonderful supply
of nets and other fishing implements, but nothing was touched.
He believed that all the people on the coast were fishermen,
who took the fish inland, for this island is very large, and so
beautiful, that he is never tired of praising it. He says he
found trees and fruits of very marvellous taste; and adds that
they must have cows or other cattle, for he saw skulls which were
like those of cows. The songs of the birds and the chirping
of crickets throughout the night lulled everyone to rest, while
the air was soft and healthy, and the nights neither hot nor cold.
On the voyage through the other islands there was great heat,
but here it is tempered like the month of May. He attributed
the heat of the other islands to their flatness, and to the wind
coming from the east, which is hot. The water of the rivers was
salt at the mouth, and they did not know whence the natives got
their drinking-water, though they have sweet water in their houses.
Ships are able to turn in this river, both entering and coming
out, and there are very good leading-marks. He says that all
this sea appears to be constantly smooth, like the river at Seville,
and the water suitable for the growth of pearls. He found large
shells unlike those of Spain. Remarking on the position of the
river and port, to which he gave the name of San Salvador, he
describes its mountains as lofty and beautiful, like the Pena
de las Enamoradas, and one of them has another little hill on
its summit, like a graceful mosque. The other river and port,
in which he now was, has two round mountains to the S.W., and
a fine low cape running out to the W.S.W.74.
Tuesday, 30th of October
He left the Rio de Mares and steered N.W., seeing a cape covered
with palm trees, to which he gave the name of Cabo de Palmas,
after having made good 15 leagues. The Indians on board the
caravel Pinta said that beyond that cape there was a river, and
that from the river to Cuba it was four days’ journey. The captain
of the Pinta reported that he understood from that, that this
Cuba was a city, and that the land was a great continent tending
far to the north. The king of that country, he gathered, was
at war with the Gran Can, whom they called Cami, and his land
or city Fava, with many other names. The Admiral resolved to
proceed to that river, and to send a present, with the letter
of the Sovereigns, to the king of that land. For this service
there was asailor who had been to Guinea, and some of the Indians
of Guanahani wished to go with him, and afterwards to return to
their homes. TheAdmiral calculated that he was forty-two degrees
to the north of the equinoctial line (but the handwriting is here
illegible). He says that he must attempt to reach the Gran Can,
who he thought was here or at the city of Cathay, which belongs
to him, and is very grand, as he was informed before leaving Spain.
All this land, he adds, is low and beautiful, and the sea deep.75.
Wednesday, 31st of October
All Tuesday night he was beating to windward, and he saw a
river, but could not enter it because the entrance was narrow.
The Indians fancied that the ships could enter wherever their
canoes could go. Navigating onwards, he came to a cape running
out very far, and surrounded by sunken rocks, and he saw a bay
where small vessels might take shelter. He could not proceed
because the wind had come round to the north, and all the coast
runs N.W. and S.E. Another cape further on ran out still more.
For these reasons, and because the sky showed signs of a gale,
he had to return to the Rio de Mares.76.
Thursday, November the 1st
At sunrise the Admiral sent the boats on shore to the houses
that were there, and they found that all the people had fled.
After some time a man made his appearance. The Admiral ordered
that he should be left to himself, and the sailors returned to
the boats. After dinner, one of the Indians on board was sent
on shore. He called out from a distance that there was nothing
to fear, because the strangers were good people and would do no
harm to anyone, nor were they people of the Gran Can, but they
had given away their things in many islands where they had been.
The Indian then swam on shore, and two of the natives took him
by the arms and brought him to a house, where they heard what
he had to say. When they were certain that no harm would be done
to them they were reassured, and presently more than sixteen canoes
came to the ships with cotton-thread and other trifles. The Admiral
ordered that nothing should be taken from them, that they might
understand that he sought for nothing but gold, which they call
nucay. Thus they went to and fro between the ships and the shore
all day, and they came to the Christians on shore with confidence.
The Admiral saw no gold whatever among them, but he says that
he saw one of them with a piece of worked silver fastened to his
nose. They said, by signs, that within three days many merchants
from inland would come to buy the things brought by the Christians,
and would give information respecting the king of that land.
So far as could be understood from their signs, he resided at
a distance of four days’ journey. They had sent many messengers
in all directions, with news of the arrival of the Admiral. “These
people,” says the Admiral, “are of the same appearance
and have the same customs as those of the other islands, without
any religion so far as I know, for up to this day I have never
seen the Indians on board say any prayer; though they repeat the
Salve and Ave Maria with their hands raised to heaven, and they
make the sign of the cross. The language is also the same, and
they are all friends; but I believe that all these islands are
at war with the Gran Can, whom they called Cavila, and his province
Bafan. They all go naked like the others.” This is what
the Admiral says. “The river,” he adds, “is very
deep, and the ships can enter the mouth, going close to the shore.
The sweet water does not come within a league of the mouth.
It is certain,” says the Admiral, “that this is the
mainland, and that I am in front of Zayto and Guinsay, a hundred
leagues, a little more or less, distant the one from the other.
It is very clear that no one before has been so far as this
by sea. Yesterday, with wind from the N.W., I found it cold.”77.
Friday, 2nd of November
The Admiral decided upon sending two Spaniards, one named
Rodrigo de Jerez, who lived in Ayamonte, and the other Luis de
Torres, who had served in the household of the Adelantado of Murcia,
and had been a Jew, knowing Hebrew, Chaldee, and even some Arabic.
With these men he sent two Indians, one from among those he had
brought from Guanahani, and another a native of the houses by
the river-side. He gave them strings of beads with which to buy
food if they should be in need, and ordered them to return in
six days. He gave them specimens of spices,to see if any were
to be found. Their instructions were to ask for the king of that
land, and they were told what to say on the part of the Sovereigns
of Castile, how they had sent the Admiral with letters and a present,
to inquire after his health and establish friendship, favoring
him in what he might desire from them. They were to collect information
respecting certain provinces, ports, and rivers of which the Admiral
had notice, and to ascertain their distances from where he was.78.
This night the Admiral took an altitude with a quadrant, and
found that the distance from the equinoctial line was 42 degrees.
He says that, by his reckoning, he finds that he has gone over
1142 leagues from the island of Hierro. He still believes that
he has reached the mainland.79.
Saturday, 3rd of November
In the morning the Admiral got into the boat, and, as the
river is like a great lake at the mouth, forming a very excellent
port, very deep, and clear of rocks, with a good beach for careening
ships, and plenty of fuel, he explored it until he came to fresh
water at a distance of two leagues from the mouth. He ascended
a small mountain to obtain a view of the surrounding country,
but could see nothing, owing to the dense foliage of the trees,
which were very fresh and odoriferous, so that he felt no doubt
that there were aromatic herbs among them. He said that all he
saw was so beautiful that his eyes could never tire of gazing
upon such loveliness, nor his ears of listening to the songs of
birds. That day many canoes came to the ships, to barter with
cotton threads and with the nets in which they sleep, called hamacas.80.
Sunday, 4th of November
At sunrise the Admiral again went away in the boat, and landed
to hunt the birds he had seen the day before. After a time, Martin
Alonso Pinzon came to him with two pieces of cinnamon, and said
that a Portuguese, who was one of his crew, had seen an Indian
carrying two very large bundles of it; but he had not bartered
for it, because of the penalty imposed by the Admiral on any one
who bartered. He further said that this Indian carried some brown
things like nutmegs. The master of the Pinta said that he had
found the cinnamon trees. The Admiral went to the place, and
found that they were not cinnamon trees. The Admiral showed the
Indians some specimens of cinnamon and pepper he had brought from
Castile, and they knew it, and said, by signs, that there was
plenty in the vicinity, pointing to the S.E. He also showed them
gold and pearls, on which certain old men said that there was
an infinite quantity in a place called Bohio, and that the people
wore it on their necks, ears, arms, and legs, as well as pearls.
He further understood them to say that there were great ships
and much merchandise, all to the S.E. He also understood that,
far away, there were men with one eye, and others with dogs’ noses
who were cannibals, and that when they captured an enemy, they
beheaded him and drank his blood, and cut off his private parts.81.
The Admiral then determined to return to the ship and wait for
the return of the two men he had sent, intending to depart and
seek for those lands, if his envoys brought some good news touching
what he desired. The Admiral further says: “These people
are very gentle and timid; they go naked, as I have said, without
arms and without law. The country is very fertile. The people
have plenty of mames which are like carrots and have the flavor
of chestnuts; and they have faxones and beans of kinds very different
from ours. They also have much cotton, which they do not sow,
as it is wild in the mountains, and I believe they collect it
throughout the year, because I saw pods empty, others full, and
flowers all on one tree. There are a thousand other kinds of
fruits, which it is impossible for me to write about, and all
must be profitable.” All this the Admiral says.82.
Monday, 5th of November
This morning the Admiral ordered the ship to be careened,
afterwards the other vessels, but not all at the same time. Two
were always to beat the anchorage, as a precaution; although he
says that these people were very safe, and that without fear all
the vessels might have been careened at the same time. Things
being in this state, the master of the Niña came to claim a reward
from the Admiral because he had found mastic, but he did not bring
the specimen, as he had dropped it. The Admiral promised him
a reward, and sent Rodrigo Sanchez and master Diego to the trees.
They collected some, which was kept to present to the Sovereigns,
as well as the tree. The Admiral says that he knew it was mastic,
though it ought to be gathered at the proper season. There is
enough in that district for a yield of 1000 quintals every year.
The Admiral also found here a great deal of the plant called
aloe. He further says that the Puerto de Mares is the best in
the world, with the finest climate and the most gentle people.
As it has a high, rocky cape, a fortress might be built, so that,
in the event of the place becoming rich and important, the merchants
would be safe from any other nations. He adds: “The Lord,
in whose hands are all victories, will ordain all things for his
service. An Indian said by signs that the mastic was good for
pains in the stomach.”83.
Tuesday, 6th of November
Yesterday, at night, says the Admiral, the two men came back
who had been sent to explore the interior. They said that after
walking 12 leagues they came to a village of 50 houses, where
there were a thousand inhabitants, for many live in one house.
These houses are like very large booths. They said that they
were received with great solemnity, according to custom, and all,
both men and women, came out to see them. They were lodged in
the best houses, and the people touched them, kissing their hands
and feet, marvelling and believing that they came from heaven,
and so they gave them to understand. They gave them to eat of
what they had. When they arrived, the chief people conducted
them by the arms to the principal house, gave them two chairs
on which to sit, and all the natives sat round them on the ground.
The Indian who came with them described the manner of living
of the Christians, and said that they were good people. Presently
the men went out, and the women came sitting round them in the
same way, kissing their hands and feet, and looking to see if
they were of flesh and bones like themselves. They begged the
Spaniards to remain with them at least five days. The Spaniards
showed the natives specimens of cinnamon, pepper, and other spices
which the Admiral had given them, and they said, by signs, that
there was plenty at a short distance from thence to S.E., but
that there they did not know whether there was any. Finding
that they had no information respecting cities, the Spaniards
returned; and if they had desired to take those who wished to
accompany them, more than 500 men and women would have come, because
they thought the Spaniards were returning to heaven. There came,
however, a principal man of the village and his son, with a servant.
The Admiral conversed with them, and showed them much honor.
They made signs respecting many lands and islands in those parts.
The Admiral thought of bringing them to the Sovereigns. He says
that he knew not what fancy took them; either from fear, or owing
to the dark night, they wanted to land. The ship was at the time
high and dry, but, not wishing to make them angry, he let them
go on their saying that they would return at dawn, but they never
came back. The two Christians met with many people on the road
going home, men and women with a half-burnt weed in their hands,
being the herbs they are accustomed to smoke. They did not find
villages on the road of more than five houses, all receiving them
with the same reverence. They saw many kinds of trees, herbs,
and sweet-smelling flowers; and birds of many different kinds,
unlike those of Spain, except the partridges, geese, of which
there are many, and singing nightingales. They saw no quadrupeds
except the dogs that do not bark. The land is very fertile,
and is cultivated with yams and several kinds of beans different
from ours, as well as corn. There were great quantities of cotton
gathered, spun, and worked up. In asingle house they saw more
than 500 arrobas, and as much as 4000 quintals could be yielded
every year. The Admiral said that “it did not appear to
be cultivated, and that it bore all the year round. It is very
fine, and has a large boll. All that was possessed by these people
they gave at a very low price, and a great bundle of cotton was
exchanged for the point of a needle or other trifle. They are
a people,” says the Admiral, “guileless and unwarlike.
Men and women go as naked as when their mothers bore them. It
is true that the women weara very small piece of cotton-cloth
which covers their private parts and no more, and they are of
very good appearance, not very dark, less so than the Canarians.
I hold, most serene Princes, that if devout religious persons
were here, knowing the language, they would all turn Christians.
I trust in our Lord that your Highnesses will resolve upon this
with much diligence, to bring so many great nations within the
Church, and to convert them; as you have destroyed those who would
not confess the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. And after
your days, all of us being mortal, may your kingdoms remain in
peace, and free from heresy and evil, and may you be well received
before the eternal Creator, to whom I pray that you may have long
life and great increase of kingdoms and lordships, with the will
and disposition to increase the holy Christian religion as you
have done hitherto. Amen!”84.
“To-day I got the ship afloat, and prepared to depart on
Thursday, in the name of God, and to steer S.E. in search of gold
and spices, and to discover land.”85.
These are the words of the Admiral, who intended to depart on
Thursday, but, the wind being contrary, he could not go until
the 12th of November.

INTRODUCCION. 




A Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de la Nue- 
va Esimna escrita por Benial Diaz del Casti- 
llo, uuo de BUS conquistadorefl, fue conocida 
y estimadade loa cronistas y bibliografos antes 
de salir a luz; Antonio de Herrera la cita 
f recuentemente, ^ fray Juan de Torquemada 
tambi^n se refiere d el la en distintas ocasio- 
nes " y el Lie. Antonio de Leon Pinelo le consagra algunas 
lineas en su bibliografia sucinta.'^ Aiinque el autdgrafo se 
ha conservado siempre en Guatemala, primero por el au- 
tor, despues por sus descendientes y posteriormente por el 
Ayuntaraiento de la Capital, en cuyo archivo existe toda- 
via hoy, se saco desde el siglo XVI una copia de 61, la cual 



1 Historia general do los hechos de los castellanos en las Islas i Tie- 
rra Fimie del Mar Oceano. Madrid. 1726-30. D^cada 2l\ pdssim. — La 
1" edici6n es de 1601. 

2 Los veinte i vn libros ritiialos y monarchia Indiana. Madrid. 1723. 
Tomo I, psim. — La l' edici6n es de 1615. 

3 Epitome de la Bibliotoca Oriental i Occidental, Nautica y Geo- 
grafica. Madrid. 1629. P6g. 75. 

Bernal Diaz del CastUlo.— 2» 



fu6 remitida & Espana al Rey don Felipe 11^ y consultada 
alll por los cronistas reales. 

Publicada la Historia Verdadera en Madrid por fray 
Alonso Rem6n, de la orden de la Merced, el afio de 1632, 
principi6 d ser considerada desde entonces, universalmen- 
te, como la mis completa y veraz de las cronicas de la Con- 
qulsta de la Nueva Espafia. Alcanzd alld mismo, casi in- 
mediataraente, una segunda edicion, y afios despu^s una 
tercera, una cuarta y una quinta; fue traducida al ingl6fl 
por Maurice Keatinge en 1800 y John Ingram Lockart en 
1844; al alemdn por Ph. J. von Kehfues en 1838 y Karl 
Ritter en 1848; al frances por D. Jourdanel en 1876 y Jo- 
se Maria de Heredia en 1877^ y al hiingaro por KAroly 
Brdzik en 1878 y M6zes Gaal en 1899. 

Varlas de estas traducciones obtuvieron los honores de 
una segunda edici6n, como la de Keatinge en 1803,* la de 
Rehf ues en 1843 y la de Jourdanet en 1877. 

Naturalmente, circularon en Mexico de una manera pro- 
f usa las cinco ediciones madrilenas, lo mismo que otra he- 
cha en castellano, en Paris, el ano de 1837; mas con ser 
tantas, no bastaron d satisfacer la demanda creciente que 
entre nosotros ha tenido de continuo la Historia Verdade- 



1 As! lo declaraba el afio de 1579 Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo de Me- 
drano. En Historia de Guatemala 6 Recordaci6n Florida por D. Fran- 
cisco Antonio de Fuentes y Guzm&n. Madrid. 1882-83. Tomo I, p%. 
398. 

2 Aunque publicadas ambas traducciones francesas con un afio de 
interval©, fueron emprendidas al mismo tiempo por el distinguido au- 
tor de la Influerice de ki pression de Vair sur la vie de Vhomme^ y el 
eximio poeta 6 quien la Francia debe Les TrophSes inimitables. Esta 
simultaneidad indica bien la extraordinaria importancia de la Hiaio- 
via Verdadera, 

3 Escribe D. Jourdanet, en el Prefacio de su traducci6n, que la ver- 
si6n inglesa fu6 reimpresa "en Liverpool y en Bostcm;" pero desgra- 
ciadamente ignora tl omite las fechas de ambas reimpresiones y tam- 
poco indica si se refiere 6 la traddcci6n de Keatinge 6 d la de Lockart. 



XI 

ra, y per esto fu6 precise reimprimirla tambi^n aqui tres 
veces, en 1854, en 1870 y en 1891: es que el transcurso del 
tiempo, lejos de aminorar el merito de la Historia Verda- 
dera, lo ha venido aquilatando hasta hacer de ella, segiin 
ha dicho nuestro eminente don Jos^ Fernando Ramirez, 
'*la joya mis preciosa de la historia raexicana.'' * 

Si todavfa & fines del siglo XVII hubo una voz desauto- 
rizada que intent6 desprestigiar la Historia Verdadera^ hoy, 
nacionales y extranjeros ven en ella una obra animada de 
espiritu de verdad,* que evoca el autor "como d una divi- 
nidad;"^ libro que tiene ''autoridad considerable;"^ escri- 
to con tanta ingenuidad, con detalles tan interesantes, con 
una vanidad tan divertida y perdonable, que "es uno de 
lofl mte curiosos que se pueden leer en cualquier idioma;" ** 
el cual debe estimarse como ''eldocumento mds aiit^ntico" ^ 
6 principal* de la Historia de la Oonquista de la Nueva 
Espafia, cuyo cuadro "no se comprende ni se ve vivir sino 
leyendo la relaci6n del soldado cronista,''* la que, en ori- 



1 Bantismo de Moteuhzoma. En Boletln de la Sociedad Mexicana 
de Greografla y Estadlstica. Mexico, 1861-1903. Primera serie, Tomo X, 
p^. 366. 

2 Antonio de SoUb. Historia de la Conqnista de Mexico. Madrid. 
1684. Tomo I, lib. I, cap. II, ptosim. 

3 William H. Prescott. History of the Conquest of Mexico. With 
an introduction by George Parker Winship. London. 1901. Tomo II, 
p6g. 462.— La 1' edici6n es de 1843. 

4 John Ingram Lockart, en su traducci6n de la Historia Verda- 
dera^ tomo I, pfig. IV. 

5 Arthur Helps. The Spanish CJonquest in America. London. 1855- 
61. Tomo Ilf p&g. 236. 

6 W. Robertson. Oeuvres completes. Pr6c6d6es d'une notice par J. 
A, C. Buchon. Paris. 853. Tomo II, p&g. 834. 

7 Luis Gonzalez Obreg6n. El Capitto Bemal Diaz del Castillo. M6- 
xico, 1894. P^. 6. 

8 The works of Hubert Howe Bancroft. San Francisco. 1883-90. To- 
mo IX, p«g. 697. 

9 Eug^ne-Melchior de Vogfle. Un compagnon de Cortez. — La Chro- 



xn 

ginalidad "compite con cualquiera obra de los tiempos mo- 
dernos, sin exceptuar ''Don Quixote;"* llamada tambien 
producci6n "linica en la literatura universal," que eclipsa 
''todas las cr6nicas e historias escritas antes 6 despues so- 
bre el mismo asunto."^ 

Es de advertirse que no ha sido nunca un secreto que 
Remon adulter6 profundamente el texto del original. Don 
Antonio de Le6n Pinelo, al dar noticia de la Historia Ver- 
dadera en 1629, decfa, indudableraente sin malicia, que 
fray Aionso Remon guardaba una copia * 'corregida, " pa- 
ra darla & la estampa.'' Apenas irapresa, el autor del Isa- 
goge Hist5rico Apolog^tico descubria en el la "rauclias co- 
ssas anadidas que no se leen en el original MS."^ Mas 
expllcito y con mejor conocimiento de causa, don Francis- 
co Antonio de Fuentes y Guzman, rebisnieto del autor y 
poseedor entonces del codice aut6grafo, escribla A fines de 
la misma centuria que el libro sacado d luz por el reveren- 
do padre maestro fray Aionso Rem6n, diferia considera- 
blemente del original, ''porque en unas partes tiene de 
rads, y en otras de menos de lo que escribi6 el autor mi 
bisabuelo, como lo reconozco adulterado en los capftulos 
164 y 171, y asf en otras partes del progreso de la historia, en 
que no solamente se oscurece el cr6dito y fidelidad de mi 
Castillo, sino que se defraudan muchos verdaderos meritos 
de verdaderos heroes;"^ Fuentes y Guzmdn aseguraba que 
tales adulteraciones no eran ciertamente el menor de los 



niquo de Bernal Diaz. En Revue des Deux Mondes. LIV" aim^o. — 
Troisi6me p6riode. Paris, 1884. Tomo LXIII, p6g. 128. , 

1 John Ingram Lockart, lugar citado. 

2 Bartolom6 Mitre, en Viaje al Rio de la Plata por Ulrich Schml- 
del. Buenos Aires, 1903. P6g. 5. 

3 Obra citada, pdg. 75. 

4 El Isagoge se public6 en MjRlrid hasta el afio de 1892. V6ase su 
pdg. 344. 

5 Obra citada, tomo T, i)(lg. 12. 



xin 

inotivos que habfa tenido 61 para escribir su propia obra. ^ 
A principios del siguiente siglo, fray Francisco Vazquez 
demoBtraba que fray Bartolom6 de Olmedo no estuvo en 
Guatemala durante su conquista, como se leia en la edici6n 
de Remon, ni fue, por tanto, el primero que difundiera la 
fe de Cristo por aquella provincia, & menos, decfa, que se 
admitiera otro milagro como el de San Antonio de Padua, 
que se liall6 A un tiempo en dos lugares diversos.* 

Anos despues, Don Andres Gonzdlez Barcia, refiriendose 
al cargo que Fuentes y Guzmdn habia lanzado contra Re- 
m6n, supuso arbitrariamente que las variantes que existian 
entre la edici6n hecha por ^ste y el codice autografo, no 
ofrecfan ningana importancia, y dedujo llanamente que 
era "facil de creer, que al copiarla, mudase el autor algu- 
nas [cosas], como sucede regularmente." ^ La defensa no 
convencia, por lo cual en Mexico nuestro gran bibliografo 
don Juan Jos6 de Eguiara y Eguren objetaba finamente que 
tambien el P. Vazquez habfa tachado de falsa la primera 
edicion;* y en Espana el infatigable cronista don Juan 
Bautista Muiioz trabajaba por adquirir una copia del codi- 
ce autografo con el objeto de averiguar las alteraciones de- 
bidas al P. Rem6n.^ 

Por ultimo, si algima duda podfa caber todavia acerca 
de la mala fe de Rem6n, vinieron A desvanecerla por com- 



1 Alll mismo, p6g. 8. 

2 Chronica de la Provincia del Santissimo Nobre de Jesvs de 
Gvaiemala. Guatemala. 1714-16. Tomo I, p6g. 11. 

3 En Epitome de la Bibliotheca Oriental, y Occidental, nautica, y 
geografica. Afiadido y enmendado nuevamente. Madrid, 1737-38. To- 
mo II, col. 604. 

4 Bibliotheca Mexicana. Mexico, 1755. Tomo I y linico, pAg. 440. 

5 Gaceta de Guatemala fecha 18 de septiembre de 1797, citada por 
el Ilmo. Sr. Dr. D. Francisco de Paula Garcia PelAez en sus Momo- 
rias jxira la Historia del Antiguo Eeyno de Guatt^mala. Guatt^mala, 
1851-52. Tomo IT, p6g. 264. 



XIV 

pleto los historiadores guatemaltecos el P. Domingo Jua- 
rros,* don Jos6 Milla,^ el obispo don Francisco de Paula 
Garcia PeUez* y don Ram6n A. Salazar/ que, como testi- 
gos de vista, corroboraron plenamente lo aseverado por bus 
predecesores elautor del Isagoge, Fuentes y Guzmdn y Vdz- 
quez. 

Con efecto, en el § IV de estas Noticias y en el niim. 2 
de su Ap6ndice, haremos ver ripidamente que fray Alon- 
so Rem6n, al iraprimir la HistoHa Verdgdera, suprimid fo- 
lios enteros del aut6grafo, interpoW otros, adultero los he- 
chos, vari6 los nombres de personas y lugares, aument6 6 
disminuy6 las cifras, modified el estilo y rejuvenecio la or- 
tograffa; movido, ora por espiritu religioso y falso patrio- 
tismo, ora por simpatfas personales y p6simo gusto litera- 
rio: como todas las ediciones posteriores, sin exceptuar una 
sola de las traducciones, estaban calcadas sobre la primera 
edici6n hecha por Rem6n, resultaba que en realidad no co- 
nocfamos la Historia Verdadera. 

Ahora bien, era un deber nuestro, una verdadera deuda 
nacional, publicar tan inapreciable cr6nica, que es, sin du- 
da, una de las mejores de cuantas obras liist6ricas tenga- 
mos, y la mAs autorizada y veridica de las escritas acerca 
de la Conquista. Asl lo comprendi6 desde hace veinte alios 
nuestro buen amigo y erudito bibli6filo don Jos6 Maria de 
Agreda, quien hizo empefiosas gestiones para obtener una 
copia fiel del c6dice aut6grafo, si bien le f u6 imposible con- 
seguirla. Con posterioridad, hacia 1891, los Sres. don Joa- 



1 Compendio de la Historia de la Ciudad de Guatemala. Guatema- 
la, 1808-18. Tomo I, p6g. 165. 

2 Historia de la America Central. Guatemala, 1879-82. Tomo I, 
pAgs. Vy^ del Pr6logo. 

3 Obra citada. Tomo I, p6gs. 343-44 y tomo II, p6gs. 263. 

4 Historia del Desenvolvimiento Intelectual de Guatemala. Guate- 
mala, 1897. Tomo I y tinico, p6g. 129. 



XV 

qnfn Garcia Icazbalceta, mi excelente amigo y Babio ar- 
que61ogo don Alfredo .Chavero, don Francisco del Paso y 
Troncoso, don Jos6 M. Vigil, el propio don Jos6 Maria de 
Agreda y don Francisco Sosa, miembros dlrectores de la 
Junta Colombina de Mexico, desplegaron asimismo activas 
diligencias para lograr dicha copia, pero desgraciadamen- 
te no alcanzaron mejor resultado. 

El 20 de octubre de 1895, don Emilio Le5n, Enviado 
Extraordinario y Ministro Plenipotenciario de la Repiibli- 
ca de Guatemala, cerca de Mexico, obsequi6 en nombre de 
su gobiemo al nuestro, ^'en prueba de amistad y especial 
deferencia,'' una reproduccidn fotogrdfica del c6dice aut6- 
grafo. Creydse entonces fundadamente que al fin se veria 
publicada la Historia Verdadera; mas no fu6 esto realiza- 
ble, porque en la rei)roducci6n obsequiada se prohibian ex- 
presamente su copia e irapresidn. 

Cinco anos mds tarde, cuando escribia yo mi obra titula- 
da Caracter de la Conquista Espanola en America y en 
Mexico, me persuadi de que para perf eccionar nuestra Histo- 
ria antigua era indispensable una edici6n exacta de la His- 
toria Verdadera^ y quise Uevar k cabo esta edici6n. Poco 
despu^, en agosto de 1901, escribi al actual senor Presi- 
dente de Guatemala don Manuel Estrada Cabrera, mani- 
festdndole mis deseos de imprimir el precioso c6dice. El 
distinguido f uncionario se sirvid contestarme, el 1 ^ del si- 
guiente mes, que el propio dia habia acordado se sacase 
"una copia exacta y completa del autdgrafo'' y se me re- 
mitiera para los efectos que yo le habia expresado. El Sr. 
don Juan I. Argueta, Secretario de Gobemaci6n y Justi- 
cia en aquella Repiiblica, principid luego k remitirme con 
toda puntualidad la copia acordada A, medida que se iba 
sacando, la cual corregia yo aqui y corapletaba cuidadosa 
y fielmente en vista de la referida reproduccidn fotogrdfi- 
ca, conservada en nuestra Biblioteca NacionaL 

Concluido el cotejo, el 8r. Presidente Gral. don Porfirio 



XVI 

Diaz tuvo d bien diaponer que la Historia Verdadera fuese 
impresa por la Oficina Tipogr^fica de la Secretaria de Fo- 
iTiento, la cual, bajo la inteligente direcci6n del Sr. don 
Joaquin Be8n6, ha hecho la impresion en pocos meses y con 
la mayor limpieza. 

Asf, pues, la edicl6n definitiva de la Historia Verdade- 
ra eacrita por uno de los Conquistadores de Mexico y de 
Guatemala, se debe d los supremos Gobernantes de ambas 
Naciones ya independientes. 

Escribe el autor que al acabar de sacar en limpio su re- 
laci6n, se la pidieron prestada dos licenciados de Guatema- 
la, y que 61 se las facilit31uego de la mejor voluntad; pero 
advirti^ndoles que no tocasen en enmendar coaa ninguna 
ni en poner ni quitar, pues cuanto habia escrito era ver- 
dadero. De seguro que por este tftulo no quedarfa descon- 
tento de nosotros el autor, porque hemos cuidado de res- 
petar religiosamente el texto del original, sin introducir la 
m^ leve variante, ni aiin de simple ortografia 6 puntua- 
ci6n. Cualquiep cambio habria sido peligroso y nos liabria 
hecho incurrir quizA en el mismo pecado que imputamos k 
Rem6n: nadie ignora que con una sola coma se puede vol- 
ver contradictoria una proposici6n. Reproducimos en notas 
puestas al pie de las pdginas todas las testaduras que pue- 
den tener algiin interns para los curiosos lectores, y de 
igual modo transcribimos varios borradores que, ^ parte de 
of recer importantes variantes, dan idea del metodo de com- 
I)osici6n del autor. Muy de tarde en tarde, cuando lo exi- 
ge la cabal inteligencia del texto, 6 con el fin de comple- 
tar determinada palabra 6 frase, 6 enmendar algiin error 
num^rico manifiesto, osamos intercalar tal 6 cual palabra 
6 ntimero entre corchetes para que desde luego se sepa que 
no habla el autor, y los lectores queden en libertad de ad- 
mitir 6 no la pequena .interpolaci6n ; nos hemos permitido, 
por ultimo, indicar con puntos suspensivos las lagunasque 
presenta el original y que felizmente son rarisimas, salvo 



XVII 

en lo8 folios primero y ultimos, que por raz6n natural han 
tenido que suf rir del tiempo mucho mis que los otros. 

Ojald merezca nuestra humilde labor la aprobaci6n de 
los inteligentes y eruditos: la deseamos tanto como teme- 
mos su censura. 



Bernal Diaz del Castillo.- 




BERNAL DIAZ DEL CASTILLO. 

SU VIDA. 




' ON muchos loa estudios publicados acerca de Ber- 
nal Diaz del Castillo y su obra por escritores tan 

i)' distinguidos como Robertson, Ery^s, Rehfues, 
Prescott, Lockart, Vedia, Valentini, Garcia Icazbalceta, 
Heredia, Bancroft, Zaragoza, Vogue, Gonzalez Obreg6n, 
Batres Jauregui, ilustrado descendiente del autor, y otros 
varios hi8tori6grafos y criticos. Empero, esos estudios son 
comiinmente deficientes 6 contradictorios, pues en tanto 
que unos, verbigracia, no fijan las fechas del nacimiento y 
muerte de Bernal, otros aseguran que nacio hacia 1493, 
anos antes 6 afios despues, y quemuri6 en 1560, en 1570, A 
fines del mismo siglo 6 & principios del siguiente, por lo que, 
conforme a una justa met^ora, vivi6 d caballo sobre tres si- 
glos. Tales lagunas y discordancias son originadas funda- 
mentalmente por lo exiguo de los documentos de la epoca 
relativos al autor 

Aun cuando s61o sea por el propio motivo, nuestro estu- 
dio tiene que ser tan incompleto y defectuoso corao los an- 
teriores, si no mAs. No pudimos renunciar, sin embargo, d 



XX 

deciralgunas palabras acerca del autor en la edici6n defini- 
tiva de su Historia Verdadera.^ 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo naci6 en la muy noble 6 insigne 
y muy nombrada Villa de Medina del Campo, el afio de 
1492,^ exactamente cuando Crist6bal Colon unfa d ambos 
mundos. Bernal nos dice que en el tiempo en que se resol- 
vi6 d. venir k la Nueva Espana, 6 sea hacia 1517, era mance- 
bo "de obra de veynte e quatro anos," dato que corrobora 
la fecha de su nacimiento. 

Fueron sus padres D. Francisco Diaz del Castillo y D^ 
Maria Diez Rejdn.^ 

Desde muy atrds se ha discutido sobre si el autor se apie- 
llidaba Diaz 6 Diez. Fray Alonso Remon le llam6 de uno 
y otro modo^ y Gil Gonzalez de Avila, Bernabe Diez, al 
transcribir un epitafio que para el sepulcro del autor com- 
puso su deudo Juan Diez de la Calle,^ quien, no obstante, 
en obra propia le llama Bernal Diaz.® Todavia en nuestros 
tiempos no se ha dilucidado la cuesti6n; Bandelier asienta, 
autoritariamente que el autor se Uamaba Bernal Diez, '*not 



1 AdvertiremoB de una vez por todas que nuestra fuente principal 
de infonnaci6n es el mismo Bernal Diaz del Castillo, en el presente 
libro y en bub cartas y probanza de m6ritos y servicios publicadas en 
la Colecci6n de Documentos In^ditos para la Historia de Espafia. 
Madrid. 1842-96. Tomo LXX, p6gB. 595 y sigs.; Cartas de Indias. 
Madrid. 1877. P^. 38 y sigs., y Fuentes y Guzm&n, obra citada, to- 
mo I, p6gs. 369 y sigs. Debe entenderse, pues, que los hechos y fra- 
ses textuales consignados aqid, estdn tornados de dichos documentos, 
salvo, naturalmente, ix;Ldicaci6n expresa en contrario. 

2 V6ase el nti m. 2 del Ap^ndioe. 

3 Fuentes y GuzmAn, obra citada, tomo I, pfig. 13. 

4 Respectivamente en su edici6n de la Historia Verdadera y en 
su Historia General de Ntra. S? de la Merced Redencion de Cautiuos. 
Madrid. 1633. Fols. 103 fte. y 104 fte. y vto. 

5 Teatro EclesiAstico de la Primitiva Iglesia de las Indias Occi- 
dentales. Madrid. 1649-55. Tomo I, p&g. 177. 

6 Memorial y Noticias sacras y reales del Imperio de las Indias 
OccidentaleB. [Sin lugar de impresi6n.] 1646. Fol. 172 vto. 



xxr 

Diaz," agrega con enfado;^ Garcia Icazbalceta, aunque al 
principio le llamd Diaz,^ despu^s vari6 de opini6n y escri- 
bi6 que no podia ' 'haber duda de que se llainaba Dlez del 
Castillo;" ^ Valentini habia asegurado tree afios antes que 
dona Maria Josefa Diez del Castillo, descendiente de Ber- 
nal, le manifestd "que solamente por ignorancia los auto* 
res habian corrompido el nombre de su familia en Diaz, 
siendo el nombre genuino Diez del Castillo, esto es, los 
Diez del Castillo [the Ten of the Castle.]" ^ Pero es preci- 
samente otro descendiente, don Antonio Batres J^uregui, 
quien afirma, por lo contrario, que '*nadie hapuesto jamis 
en duda que [el autor] se llamara Bemal Diaz del Casti- 
llo," ^ lo que es mucho decir, porque fu6 nada menos que 
su majestad don Felipe II quien, viviendo Bernal, le Ua- 
mo Diez/ Nosotros Uegamos hasta admitir que el autor se 
firmara Diez en diversos escritos, segiin asienta don Jos6 
Milla;^ pero no que de aqui se deba concluir que as! se 
apellidara efectivaraente, porque en otros muchos docu- 
mentoB que todos conocemos,® se firm6 Diaz. 



1 Notes on the biblic^aphy of Yucatan and Central America. 
Worcester. 1881. P&g. 4. 

2 Diccionario Universal de Historia y Geografia. Mexico. 1853-56. 
Tomo III, p6gs. 60-1. 

3 Mexico en 1554. Mexico. 1875. Pdg. 75. 

4 American Historical Record. Philadelphia. 1872. Tomo I, ntlm. 12. 

5 Guatemala Literaria. Guatemala. 1903. Afio I, ntim. 4. 

6 Nobiliario de CJonquistadores de Indias. Madrid. 1892. P6g8. 
69-70. 

7 Obra citada, tomo I, p6g. 1* del Pr6logo. 

Parece que en el aut6grafo de la Historia Verdadera, al final del ca- 
pltulo CCXII, el autor se firm6 Diez; mas la firma puesta alll hace 
poca fe, porque, como ha observado ya Heredia (obra citada, tomo IV, 
p6g. 402), est6 desfigurada por una mano irreverente que agujer6 to- 
do el contomo de las letras y de la rtibrica. 

8 Los mismos 6 que nos hemos referido en la nota 1 de la pAgina 
anterior. 

La firma que publicamos al pie del retrato del autor, estd tomada 



XXII 

Habremos de convenir en que se apellid6 Diaz, siatende- 
mos a que en la Historia Verdddera asi llama d su padre y 
asl se llama k si raismo doce veces por lo menos; ^ asl le 11a- 
maron sus jefes y companeros Herndn Cortes, Luis Marin, 
CrisixSbal Ferndndez, Martin Vdzquez y Bartolom6 de Vi- 
Uanueva, e igualmente otras personas que lo trataron, co- 
mo el Goberaador Alonso de Estrada, el Virrey don Anto- 
nio de Mendoza, el Secretario de la Audiencia Antonio de 
Turcios, el escribano Juan Zaragoza, los seliores del Real 
Consejo y su majestad Carlos V; por ultimo, asi le llama 
invariablemente, innnmerables ocasiones, su rebisnieto el 
erudito histori6grafo don Francisco Antonio de Fuentes y 
Guzman. ^ 

No fue Bernal hi jo linico; nos habla de un su hermano 
& quien querla imitar, mayor que 61 probablemente. 

La familia Diaz del Castillo tenia noble abolengo, cuya 
cuna estuvo situada en las mon tanas de Burgos, donde 
existio su casa de hijodalgos, en Aontonera del Valle de 
Toranzo. Consistian sus armas en ' 'Formal de plata con 
puertas y ventanas de gules, que son colorados, y dos le- 
breles de plata, remendadosde sable, que es negro, contra- 
mirandose, atrayllados a las aldavas de las puertas del Cas- 
tillo, con una traylla de oro. Los cuales lebreles traen los 
de este linaje en significacion de la lealtad con que siem- 
pre ban servido d sus Reyes. "^ El propio Bernal escribe 



de la carta que escribi6 en Guatemala, el 22 de febrero de 1552, ^ su 
majestad el Key de Espafia, la cual carta se conserva en el Archivo 
de Simancas y fu6 exhibida en la Exposici6n Hist6rico-Americana de 
Madrid, el aiio de 1892, al celebrarse el cuarto centenario del descu- 
brimieiito de America. 

1 Una de ellas, dice el autor, para no dejar lugar 6, duda: "my non- 
bre es bnal diaz del Cast^'"." V^ase el facsimile que publicamos en el 
tomo II. 

2 Obra citada, pdssim. 

3 Certificaci6n expedida per D. Jer6nimo de Villa, Rey de Armas 



XXIII 



que era hijodalgo y que sus abuelos, padre y hermano siem- 
pre fueron servidores de la corona real y de los reyes cat6- 
licos don Fernando y dofia Isabel, lo que comprueba Car- 
loB V al Uamarles "servidores y criados nuestros." 

Si la familia de Bemal no hubiera gozado de estimacidn 
y respeto en Medina del Campo, los vecinos de esta villa 
no habrian elegido regidor A don Francisco. En carabio, su 
situaci6n pecuniaria debe haber sido muy humilde, porque 
el autor vino acA enbusca de fortuna, puntualmente, y de- 
plora su pobreza con frecuencia. 

Con todo, el hecho de que revele en la Historia Verda- 
dsra un muy delicado sentido moral, regular instrucci6n, 
filosofla acertada y religiosidad no comiin, nos faculta pa- 
ra inferir que su familia le educ6 con esmero: es excepcio- 
nal que un Individ uo analfabeta e inculto durante su ju- 
ventud, adquiera esas cualidades en su vejez; consta, por 
otra parte, que el autor sabfa escribir cuando llegd d la 
Nueva Espana. A pesar de esto, nada de positivo cono- 
cemoB acerca de la nifiez y juventud de Bernal: nuestra 
informacidn principia en el afio de 1514. 

El autor cumplla entonces 22 anos de edad. 

De tal cual expresi6n suya se infiere que era alto 6 de 
"rrazonable cuerpo, " Agil, pronto, bien proporcionado y 
airoso: sus compaiieros le llamaban ''el galAn. " Si hemos 
de creer al artista que le retrato, observaremos que tenia 
cabeza esbelta y bien encajada en robustas espaldas; f ren- 
te ancha y muy elevada; ojos inteligentes, bondadosos y 
de mirar intenso; las demds facciones arm6nicas y agrada- 
bles/ 



de sn majestad D. Felipe IV, 6 8 de marzo de 1625. En Guatemala 
Literaria, ntimero citado. El escudo de armas descrito puede verse al 
lado derecho del retrato que publicamos. 

1 Una fotografla del retrato & que aludimos, encabeza el ejemplar 
de la Historia Verdadera que obsequi6 el gobiemo de Guatemala al 



XXIV 

A ejemplo de tantos otros j6venes casiellanos, Bernal de- 
j6 ^ su patria el ano de 1514 para ernigrar d America en 
busca de aventuras y riqueza, resuelto A "pare§er en algo" 
d sua ascendientes. Trdjole consigo, en calidad de solda- 
do, Pedro Arias de Avila, gobernador de Tierra Firme. Lie- 
gado a Nombre de Dies, permanecio allf tres 6 cuatro mesee, 
hasta que una epideinia que sobrevino y ciertas dif erencias 
que tuvieron el gobernador y su yerno Vasco Niinez de Bal- 
boa, le obligaron d huir & Cuba, cerca de su deudo Diego 
Veldzquez que la gobemaba. 

Durante tres aiios no hizo Bemal '*cosa ninguna que de 
contar sea," raz6n por la cual resolvi6 salir al descubri- 
miento de "tierras nuevas" con el Capitdn Francisco Her- 
nandez de C6rdova y ciento diez compafieros. Zarpan del 
puerto de Ajaruco en tres navfos, el 8 de febrero de 1517, 
y despu^s de sufrir veintiiin dlas de navegaci6n y una re- 
cia tormenta, arriban & Punta de Catoche, cuyos indigenas 
los reciben hostilmente. Tocan luego en Ldzaro y se detie- 
nen en Champoton, donde los naturales matan & cuarenta 
y ocho castellanos, aprehenden d dos. y hieren d los restan- 
tes, sin excluir al Capitdn, que recibe diez flechazos, ni 
tampoco al autor que recibe "tres y vno dellos fue bien pe- 
ligroso en el costado isquierdo, que me paso lo gtieco." 



miestro y es id^ntica d otra fotografla que nos proporcion6 el reputa- 
do bibli6grafo D. Jos^.Toribio Medina, la cual obtuvo en Guatemala: 
sobre esta tiltima fotografla estd hecho el fotograbado que publica- 
mos. Desgraciadamente no jDodemos establecer la plena autenticidad 
del referido retrato, porqne iguoramos su primitivo origen, no obstan- 
te haber procurado indagarlo. 

D. Niceto de Zamacois public6 hace alios en el tomo V de su Historia 
de Mexico, un retrato que decla ser de nuestro autor, pero manifiesta- 
mente fanttotico, abigarrado y anacr6nico; se representa joven & Ber- 
nal, en actitud melanc6licamente reflexiva, con cuello alto modemo, 
traje caprichoso que recuerda las ilustraciones de Los Tres Mosque- 
teroB, y guante de fina piel, perfectamente calzado. Dicha historia f u6 
impresa en Barcelona durante los alios de 1876 & 1882. 



XXV 

Los que sobreviven, regresan por la Florida & la Cuba, 

! desenganados y dolientes, suf riendo sed abrasadora y vien- 

dose & punto de naufragar, porque los navfos hacfan mu- 

cha agua. Al recordar estas desdichas, exclama el autor: 

*'o que cosa tan trauajosa es yr a descubrir tierras nuevas, 

I y de la manera que nosotros nos aventuramoB no se puede 

r ponderar." 

I Sin embargo, no escarmentd Bemal; su pobreza, que ne- 

1 cesariamente aumentaba cada df a, le impulsaba & buscar f or- 
tnna, aun & riesgo de perder la vida, y su juventud le ha- 
cia naturalmente impaciente; no quiso esperar los indios 
que Diego Veldzquez le habfa prometido dar luego que al- 
gunos vacasen, y pronto se alistd en una segunda expedi- 
ci6n compuesta de cuatro navios y 200 soldados al mandu 
de Juan de Grijalva, quien lev6 anclas en el puerto de Matan- 
zas, el 8 de abril de 1518. Dice el autor que venla 61 *'por 
alferes,'^ pero es dudoso. La expedicidn pas6 por Cozumel, 
Champoton, cuyos denodados habitantes hieren y quiebran 
los dientes & Grijalva y matan d siete soldados, Boca de 
T6rminog, Rio de Tabasco Uamado de Grijalva, la Rambla, 
Rfos de Tonala 6 de Santo Ant6n, de Coatzacoalcos, Papa- 
loapan 6 de Alvarado y Banderas, donde rescatan *'masde 
diez y seis my 11 pesos en Joyezuelas de oro bajo," islas 
Blanca, Verde y de Sacrificios y arenales de Uliia; de aquf 
Alvarado regresa d Cuba acompanado de varios soldados 
en demanda de auxilios, mientras que Grijalva, con el res- 
to de su gente, inclusive el autor, sigue adelante por Tux- 
tla, Tuxpan, rio de Canoas, en el que los castellanos fue- 
ron combatidos por los indfgenas, y Cabo Rojo;accediendo 
entonces Grijalva A los ruegos de sus soldados, consinti6 en 
regresar d Cuba. 

Alueinado sobremanera VeUzquez con el oro que habla 
rescatado Grijalva, organiza una tercera expedicidn forma- 
da de "onze navios grandes y pequefios," y nombra jefe 

Bernal Diaz del CastUlo.-4» 



de ella & Herndn Cort6s. Nuevamente se aliBta Bernal, que 
a la saz6n se encontraba muy *'empenado.'' 

8ali6 Cortes del puerto de la Trinidad el 18 de febrero 
de 1519. El autor habla partido echo dfas antes con Pe- 
dro de Alvarado. Reunidos todos en la isla de Cozumel, se 
hizo alarde y resultaron quinientos ocho soldados "sin 
maestres y pilotos, y marineros que serian giento //. y diez 
y seis cavallos y yeguas.^' Prosiguiendo la derrota, pasan 
frente A Cliampot6n sin atreverse A bajar d tieira; se de- 
tienen .en Tabasco, donde guerrean con los natnrales, que 
hieren al autor de "vn flechazo En el muslo, mas poea 
herida," y llegan & Uliia. 

Int^rnanse y entran d Cempoala y & Quiahuiztlan, en 
cuyas inmediaciones fundan la Villa Rica de la Veracruz, 
y determinan de ir d Mexico, cuyo senor Motecuhzoraa ha- 
bia estado cebando su ambici6n con ricos presentes de oro 
y otros objetos preciosos. Antes de emprender la marcha, 
aconsejand Cortes susaraigos (era uno de ellos Bernal) que 
diese al trav6s con los navios para evitar que algunos sol- 
dados quisieran alzarse y regresar A Cuba; y, ademd«, pa- 
ra utilizar d los maestres y pilotos y marineros * 'q serian 
Al pie de §ient personas,'' como antes dijimos. 

Hecho esto '*A ojos vistas y no como lo dize El coronista 
oromara," salen hacia Mexico A mediados de agosto, proba- 
blemente el dfa 16; atraviesan sin novedad sucesivamente 
por Jalapa, Xicochimalco, Ixhuacan, Texutla, Xocotla y 
Xalacingo; pero al Uegar d las fronteras de Tlaxcala, se 
ven detenidos por sus habitantes que los combaten duran- 
te varios dlas: alli recibe el autor ''dos heridas, la vna En 
la cabega de pedrada, y otra en el muslo de vn flechazo," 
de cuyas resultas estuvo bastante enfermo en la capital de 
Tlaxcala, despu6s de que Cortes hubo celebrado paz y alian- 
za con sus habitantes. 

'*En doze de otubre" reanudan la marcha por Cholula, 
donde hacen una monstruosa matanza, Itzcalpan, Tlalma- 



xxvn 
nalco e Itztapalatengo. Presentase aquf regiamente Caca- 
matzin, senor de Tetzcoco, ddarles la bienvenida en norabre 
de Motecuhzoma, y entran con 61 d la calzada de Itztapala- 
pan, que cruzaba rectamente la laguna hasta Uegar & Me- 
xico y desde la cual se veian A ambos lados innumerables 
*'cibdades y villas," unas entre el agna, otras en tieri'K 
flrme, y todas hermoseadas por majestuosos templos y pa- 
lacios; este panorama sorprendente, tan pintoresco como 
nuevo, caus6 honda impresi6n en Bernal y en sua compa- 
neros: ^'nos quedamos admirados [escribe] y deziamos que 
pare§ia a las cosas de encantamento que Cuentan En el li- 
bro de Amadis por las grandes torres, y cues, y edificios, 
que tenian dentro En el agua, y todos de calicanto, y avn 
algunos de nros soldados dezian, que si aquello que vian, 
si hera entre suenos." 

Cuando llegaron al punto de union de las calQadas de 
Itztapala y Coyohuacan, encuentran A muchos caciques y 
senores principales que venian precediendo d Motecuhzoma, 
quien les recibe poco mas adelante, casi d las puertas de 
Mexico, con pompa suntuosa y ceremonial estricto. Varias 
veces habia pensado el soberano mexica en atacar A los es- 
panoles; mas anonadado por la superstici6n y reducido d 
la impotencia por un cardcter temeroso e indeciso, los intro- 
ducia ahora d la gran Tenochtitlan para entregdrselas lue- 
go. El aut6crata se sentla fatalmente vencido antes de 
combatir. 

De alii que sufra d los pocos dias que le aprisionen den- 
tro de su propio palacio siete castellanos, entre ellos Ber- 
nal; permita que sus carceleros quemen & Quauhpopoca y 
d otros senores indigenas, cuyo delito consistfa en haber 
dado batalla por orden de el mismo d Juan de Escalante y 
otros soldados espanoles; ponga d discreci6n de Cortes d 
Cacamatzin, Totoquihuatzin, Cuitldhuac y Cuauhtemoc, se- 
nores respectivamente de Tetzcoco, Tlacopan, Itztapalapan 
y Tlatelolco, quienes querian libertar al propio aut6crata, y 



XXVIII 

jure obediencia, en fin, al rey de Castilla, soUozando como 
tierna mujer infortunada. 

Fdcilmente y en breve tiempo pado Cortes allegar un 
tesoro inmenso que ascendfa A ' 'setecientos mill pesos de 
oro" y que se vi6 obligado A repartir entre sus soldados; 

. hizo, no obstante, la divisi6n con tales tracalas y socaliiias, 
que d los soldados cupo *'muy poco de parte [linicamente 
cien pesos] y por ser tan poco, muchos soldados ovo q no 
lo quisieron rresgebir, y con todo se quedaba Cortes." Si el 
autor no se queja mds A causa de esto, como otros de sus 
companeros, por ejemplo, Cdrdenas, que aun '*Cayo malo 
de pensamiento y tristeza," se debe A que habfa recibido 
ya de Motecuhzoma algunos presentes de "oro y mantas" 

y ademds "vna yndia muy hermosa hija de honbre 

principal," que se aventur6 d pedir al soberano por con- 
ducto del paje Orteguilla y que de seguro creia haber ga- 
nado con sus respetuosas cortesfas, ''porque sienpre ques- 
tava En su guarda, o pasava delante del con muy gran 
acato le quitava mi bonete de armas." 

Principiaban los castellanos d gozar del oro repartido, en- 
tregdndose d una vida de placer licenciosa, cuando Pdnfilo 

. de Narvdez arrib6 & Uliia, en marzo de 1520, con 16 navlos,^ 
1,400 soldados, 90 ballesteros, 70 escopeteros y 80 caballos. 
Le enviaba Diego Veldzquez d que castigase d Cortes y A 

' su gente por traidores, pues se le habian alzado abierta- 
mente y sin motivo. Pero como estaba Cortes inmensamente 
rico, yno hay poder mayor que el delariqueza, pronto gand 
contejuelos y joyas de oro dca^i todos los soldados de Nar- 
vdez, de tal suerte que & la hora del combate, verificado en 

. Cempoala, Narvdez fu6 el linico que luch6 de veras hasta 
quedarherido y perderunojo; el autor figuro entre sus apre- 



1 El antor dice que eran 19; perd el Oidor Lucjas V&zquez de Ay- 
ll6n, que acompafii6 & Narv6ez, escribe que eran 16. (En Hemdn Cor- 
t68. Cartas y Relaciones. Paris. 1866. P^. 42.) 



XXIX 

hensores: "el primero que le echo mano f ue vn perosanchez 
farfan, buen soldado e yo se lo di al sandoval." 

Victorioso Cort6s, regresa violentamente a Mexico, cuyos 
habitantes se habian levantado en armas & fin de vengar la 
nhumana matanza hecha por Pedro de Alvarado dentro del 
teocalli mayor, lacual Alonsode Avila juzgodeshonrosa, di- 
ciendo que ella dejaria para sierapre "mala memoria en la 
Nueva Espana. " Trafa ahora Cortes sobre mil trescientos 
soldados, ochenta ballesteros, otros tantos escopeteros y no- 
ventade & caballo, sin teneren cuenta d sus numerosos alia- 
doB indigenas. 

Empero, una veztodos ellosen la GranTenochtitUn, dla 
que llegan el ' 'dia de senor san Joan de Junio de mill E 
quinientos, y veynte anos, ' ' no pueden resistir A los me- 
xica que, bajo el mando de Cuitldhuac y Cuauhtemoc, 
matan A la mayor parte de los invasores y obligan d huir A 
los restantes d Tlaxcala, heridos y arruinados, porque tam- 
poco pudieron salvar las riquezas allegadas anteriormente. 

Los tlaxcalteca les reciben, hospedan y atienden con amor. 
Un tanto repuestos los castellanos, emprenden correrfas 
vanddlicas por Tepeydcac, Cachula, Guacachula, Tecama- 
chalco, el pueblo de los Guayabos, Oziicar, Xalacingo, Za- 
catami y otros lugares cercanos, esclavizando y senalando 
con hierro candente A cuantos muchachos y mujeres encon- 
traban, "q hombres de Edad no curavamos dellos:" la in- 
humana marca se les fijaba "en la cara," y de ella no se 
libraban ni las j6venes mds hermosas. El autor no asistio A 
todas aquellas correrias, por motivo de "qstabamuy malo 
de calenturas, y Echava sangre por la boca." Entonces 
fundo Cort6s una segunda villa que llam6 de Segura de la 
Frontera. 

Reforzados los castellanos por varias expediciones veni- 
das de Cuba, resuelven volver A Mexico A recuperar las ri- 
quezas perdidas, y se dirigen desde luego hacia Tetzcoco. 
Llevaban consigo muchos mill ares de aliados indigenas. 



XXX 

Establecido en Tetzcoco el cuartel general, rompe Cortes 
las hostilidades con un asalto sobre Itztapalapa, donde el 
y los suyos se ven & punto de morir ahogados, & causa de 
que los mexica ''soltaron las a§equias de agua dulce y sa- 
lada y abrieron vna calgada:" el autor quedo *'muymal 
herido de vn bote de langa que me dieron En la garganta 
Junto del gaznate, questuve della a peligro de muerte, de 
que agora tengo una senal." No pensaba Cortes en atacar 
directamente d Mexico; comprendla que con esto no alcan- 
zaria un resultado satisfactorio; proponlase linicamente 
sitiar la ciudad y reduciria por hambre: para lograiio, ha- 
bla encomendado d los tlaxcalteca la construcci6n de 1 3 
bergantines, que esperaba con ansia. 

Entretanto, corabatfa d sangre y fuego las poblaciones 
inmediatas. El autor no concurrid & los primeros combates 
por estar enfermo aiin de su peligrosa herida; pero apenas 
le cicatriza, toma las armas de nuevo y acompana a Cortes 
d auxiliar d los naturales de Chalco, donde se distingue 
entre los soldados de mayor arrojo. 

Por su parte, Cuauhtemoc, que era hoy el Seiior de Me- 
xico, proveia ^ la defensa de su patria con resolijcion sin 
igual: habia obtenido de sus siibditos el ofrecimiento solem- 
ne de ' 'q por via ninguna no avian de hazer pages sino mo- 
rir todos peleando o quitarnos a nosotros las vidas." 

La lucha fu6 extraordinariamente larga, encarnizada y 
sin cuartel. Principi6 el sitio en 21 de mayo de 1521 y du- 
t6 ochenta y cinco dlas. Ni por un solo momento los mexi- 
ca llegaron ^ dar maestras de flaqueza, no obstante que ca- 
recian de agua dulce y de vlveres, y ^ pesar de la saperioridad 
de las armas de los castellanos y del incontable niimero de 
sus aliados indigenas; ^ cada nuevo dia era para ellos el pri- 



1 El autor tiende & disminuir sobremanera el ntimero de estos tilti- 
moB; mas Cort6B nos hace saber que eran ''infinita gente," **infinito 
miinero," "que no tenlan quento," que tLuicamente los que le acom- 



XXXI 

mero de la lucha, por la decision y pujanza eon que se pre- 
sentaban en el campo de combate, y asimismo porque no 
cesaban de guerrear ''desde q anianecia hasta la noche." 

Cuando habian perecido ya los m^ de ellos, todavfa en- 
tonces los pocos que subsistian, se sobreponlan estoicamen- 
te d la sed, al hambre, al cansancio y d la peste para defen- 
der d su patria, y todavfa entonces tambien rechazaban con 
indomita entereza las reiteradas proj)08icioneH de paz que 
les hacfa Cortes. No de otra suerte acabaron. 

El ej^rcito que debfa hostilizar por tierra d low niexica, 
qued6 dividido desde un principio en tree secciones. Al au- 
tor le toc6 militar en la de Tlacopan, que mandaba Pedro 
de Alvarado. Bernal estuvo allf varias veces d riesgo de 
perder la vida; primero, d rafz de haberse establecido el si- 
tio; pocos dias mas tarde, cuando los mexica lograron apre- 
henderle: "ya me habian hechado raano muchos yndios y 
tuve manera para desEnbaragar el brago y nro senor Jesux- 
po q me dio Esfuergo para q a buenas estocadas q les di, 
me salve, y bien herido En vn brago;" en otra ocasi6n con- 
siguieron tambien hacerle prisionero, mas "quiso dios q 
me Escape de su poder;" por ultimo, el dfa de la tremenda 
derrota que sufri6 Cortes, & fines de junio, el autor salio 
herido de 'Vn flechazo e vna cuchillada." 

Concluy6 el sitio el 13 de agosto de 1521 con la toma del 
. ultimo rinc6n noreste de la ciudad, donde heroicamente re- 
sistian aiin los contados mexica que para entonces sobre- 
Vivian. 

Dueiio Cortes de la Gran Tenochtitlan, reuni6, por se- 

. gunda vez, mucho oro, si bien no en tanta 9antidad como 

• anteriormente. Al procederse d la reparticion, por segunda 

vez, asimismo, quedaron profundamente disgustados los 

castellanos, porque miraban que despues de sus inmensos 



pafiaban & 61, ascendlan 6 "mas de ciento y cincnenta mil hombres." 
(Obra citada, pAgs. 221, 231, 242 y 246.) 



xxxn 
trabajos y peligros continues de muerte, ' 'cabian a los de 

. a cavallo a ochenta pesos y a los ballesteros y escopeteros 
y rrodeleros a sesenta o a cincuenta pesos q no se me acuerda 
bien." Lo mds sensible para los aventureros espafioles fue 
"q debiamos de ballestas A 5inq** y a sesenta pesos y otros 

^ de vna espada §inq** y desta manera Eran tan caras todas 
las cosas q aviamos conprado pues un cunijano que se Ua- 
mava maestre jvan que curava algunas malas heridas y se 
ygualava por la cura a excesivos pregios y tanbien vn me- 
dio matasanos q se dezia murgia q Era boticario y barbero 
q tanbien curava y otras treynta tranpa^ y tarrabusterias 
que debiamos." El autor sigui6 empefiado, en consecuen- 

* cia, no obstante su buen pelear y sus muchas y graves 

- heridas. 

Decepcionado, pero sin abandonar todavla la esperanza 

. de mejorar de fortuna, que acd le trajo, acompafi6 & sn 

. amigo Gonzalo de Sandoval A la conquista de Tuxt6pec, 
lugar abundante en oro, segiin '*los libros de la rrenta de 
montezuma," que habia estudiado el autor. Estando alld, 
Sandoval le dice que se quede y le ofrece en repartimiento 
los ricos pueblos de Matlatan, Orizaba y Ozotequipa; pero 
Bernal rehusa, "por pare§erme q si no yrya En corapafiia 
del Sandoval teniendole por amigo que no hazia lo q con- 
venia a la calidad de mi persona." 

Pasa A Coatzacoalcos, donde se f unda la Villa de Espiri- 
•tu Santo, en la que se establece Bernal, porque Cortes le 
da en encomienda, el 20 de septiembre de 1522, los pueblos 
de **Tlapa e Potonchan" pertenecientes A la provincia de 
Cimatan: uno j otro le satisfacen poco, d causa de que la 
tierra era pobre, mejor dicho, de que en ella no se halla- 
ba oro, metal que constitufa la sola riqueza posible para el 
autor y sus companeros, quienes habfan emigrado por esto 
mismo del Valle de Mexico, que no producia * 'sino mucho 
mayz y magueyales." 
Los vecinoQ de la Villa de Espfritu Santo le eligen regi- 



xxxm 
 dor, praeba clara de que le eetimaban y consideraban. Con 
todo, la naeva vida que Uevd Bemal, no dejo de ser bas- 
tante agitada; de continuo tenia que salir d pacifiear & IO0 
pueblos de la provincia, y no Bin riesgo, pues en una oca- 
8i6n recibid ' Vn flechazo en la garganta q Con la mucha 
saugre q me salia E en aql tienpo no {odia Apretallo ni 
tomar la sangre estuvo mi vida En harto peligro." 

For cuareema de 1523 sale con el capitdn Luis Marfn A 
combatir d los naturales de Chiapas, ' los mayores guerre- 
ros q yo avia visto en toda la nueva espafia Avnq Entren 
En elloB tascaltecas y mexicanos ni gapotecas ni minxes.'^ 
£1 autor marchaha ahora & caballo: indudablemente que 
BOB pueblos no eran de tierra tan pobre como habfa supues- 
to. Muchas fatigas tuvo que sufrir en esta expedici6n: los 
chiapaneca peleaban cual '^rraviosos leones,'' y en Chamu- 
la le dieron 'Vn buen bote de lan^a q me pasaron las ar- 
mas y si no f uera por El mucho Algodon y bien colchadas 
q Eran me mataran porq Con ser buenas las pasaron y 
Echaron buen pelote de algodon f uera y me dieron vna chi- 
ca herida;'* & pesar de ella, fue uno de los dos primeros 
soldados que asaltaron y tomaron la fortaleza de los indf- 
genas. En premio d su comportamiento heroico, le encomen- 
d6 Luis Marin este pueblo de Chamula, que era de gran 
importancia. 

De regreso & Espiritu Santo, se acuchillea con Godoy por 
nobilisima causa, y ambos resultan heridos. 

Bemal no g026 de sosiego largo tiempo. Acatando una 
orden de Cortes, d quien mucho temian todos los conquis- 
tadores, se ve obligado & seguir & Rodrigo Rangel & la con- 
quista de los gapoteca; justo es mencionar que no obstante 
que lo hacfa de mala gana, porque se sentia ya cansado y 
Rangel no le inspiraba simpatfa, se condujo muy cumpli- 
damente durante toda la expedici6n, por lo que mereci6 
honrosas alabanzas. Fu(^ entonces cuando los indigenas "le 
Enpendolaron siete flechas q con El mucho algodon de las 

Bernal Diaz del CastUlo.— e** 



XXXIV 

armas se detuvieron y todavia sali herido En vna pierna;" 
no retrocede, Bin embargo, sino que antes bien persigue to- 
davia largo trecho A Iob indlgenas hasta que ''se acoxieron 
a vnas grandee §ienega^ q tenblaban y no avia honbre q En 
ellas Entrase que pudiese salir sino a gatas o con grande 
ayuda." 

Vuelve d Espfritu Santo sin haber ejecutado cosa de pro- 
vecho, y sigue para Mexico, donde presencia el grandioso 
recibimiento quehace Cort6s, el 17 6 18 de junio de 1524, 
d fray Martin de Valencia y d sus doce companeros f rancis- 
canos, entre los cuales venia fray Toribio de Benavente, & 
quien los indigenas pusieron por mejor nombre Motolinia, 
''que qui ere dezir En su lengua El fray la pobre porq quan- 
to le daban por dios lo dava A los yndios y se qdava algu- 
nas bezes sin comer y traya vnos abitos muy rrotos y anda- 
va desCal9o y sienpre les predicava y los yndios le qrian 
mucho porq Era vna santa persona." 

El autor regreso & su villa casi inmediatamente. Se en- 
contraba en ella d fines de octubre del mismo afio, cuando 
lleg6 Cort6s, de paso para las Hibueras, d donde se dirigia 
con la resoluci6n de castigar personalmente & Cristobal de 
Olid que se habia rebeiado. Seguian al conquistador un 
ejercito formidable y una corte numerosa de frayles y cle- 
rigos, medicos y cirujanos, mayordomos, maestresalas, bo- 
tilleros, reposteros, despenseros, cuidadores de sus "gran- 
des baxillas de oro y plata," pajes, mozos de espuelas, 
monteros, chirimias, zacabuches, dulzaineros, volteadores, 
jugadores de manos, titiriteros, caballerizos y acemileros y 
"vna gran manada de puercos q venia comiendo." Entre 
los soldados y servidores de Cort6s, caminaban tambien, 
aunque no de grado, Cuauhtemoc y otros grandes seiiores 
indigenas. 

Llegado Cortes & Coatzacoalcos, ordena que todos los ve- 
cinos vayan con el a las Hibueras, y por esto el autor tiene 
que acompanarle: nadie habria osado entonces desobedecer 



XXXV 

& Cortes. Dura suerte era la de Bemal; como 61 dice, ^'En 
el tienpo q avlamos de rreposar de los grandes trabajos y 
procurar de aver algnnos bienes y grangerias nos manda 
yr Jornada de mas de quinientas leguas y todas las maa trrae 
por donde ybamos de guerra y dexamos perdido quanto te- 
niamos. ' ' No consol6 & Bernal ser nombrado capitdn por 
Cortes en esta ocasi6n, ni llevar consigo gente propia, re* 
clatada en Iob paeblos de bub encomiendas. 

En tanto que el autor marchaba sobre Cimatan, al fren* 
te de treinta eBpaiioles y tres mil indigenaB, Cort6s recorrfa 
los pueblos de Tonala y Ayagualulco; atravesaba un estero 
inmediato, haciendo levantar sobre 61 una ' ^puente q avia 
de largo gerca de medio quarto de legua cosa espantosa co- 
mo lo hizieron," y segufa por el gran rio de Mazapa hasta 
laa poblaciones de Iquinuapa; alll se le reuni6 el autor. 

Juntos pasaron luego por los pueblos de Copilco, Naca- 
xuxuyca, Zaguatan, Tepetitan 6 Itztapa. Buscando adelan- 
te & Hueyacala, 6 sea ''la gran acala porq avia otro pueblo 
q se dize acala la chica," ^ se internan en el monte y pier- 
den el camino, vi6ndose obligados entonces & abrir vereda 
con las espadas por entre la maleza tupida; sufren hambre 
y mueren de ella cuatro espanoles y mnchos indfgenas, que 
cafan "como desesperados:" en esta situacion extrema, Ber- 
nal y Pero Ii6pez salvan al ej6rcito, pues encuentran el per- 
dido camino, que pronto les conduce & Teraast^pec. Los 
chirimias, sacabuches y dulzaineros no daban musica ya, 
porque ' 'Eran acostunbrados a regalos e no sabian de tra- 
bajos y con la hanbre avian adolesgido;" s61o uno tenia 
dnimo para tocar "y rrenegavamos todos los soldados de lo 



1 Significa grande, efectivamente, la palabra Huey, "Vey" 6 "Uei," 
como escriben fray Alonso de Molina y R^mi Simeon, respectivamen- 
te, en el Vocabnlario en lengiia mexicana y castollana y Dictionnaire 
de la langue nahnatl, impresos, el primero, en Mexico, el afio de 1571, 
y el segundo, en Paris, el afio de 1885. 



XXXVI 

oyr y deziamoB q paresyia gorras y adives q ahullavan y que 
valient mas tener mayz q comer q muaica." 

En Cignatep^cad, el autor y Gonzalo Mexfa se adelantan 
por orden de Cortes & atraer de paz & lo8 natnrales de los 
puebloB de Acala, miRi6n que Bemal, por su parte, desem- 
pefia satisfactoriamente, pues regresa luego con gran can- 
tidad de provisiones; mas como los soldados estaban ham- 
brien{os, las arrebatan todas y se las disputan entre si; en 
vano les gritaba el despensero que dejaran algo para Cor- 
t6s; los soldados contestaban irritados: "buenos puercos 
habeys comidovos y Cortes." Sabedor 6ste de lo ocurrido, 
se resigna, pregunta al autor de manera melosa si no deJ6 
escondido un poco de bastimento en el camino, y acaba por 
rogarle humildemente que lo parta con 61: accede el autor 
y le convida generosamente de lo que habfa reservado para 
SI y los naturales de los pueblos de sus encomiendas. 

Entra el ej^rcito en la provincia de Aoala; allf, en Izan- 
G^nac, Cortes manda ahorcar & Cuauhtemoc y 4 su primo 
Tetepanquetzatl, sefior de Tlacopan, por sospechas que tu- 
vo de una conspiraci6n; el autor nos dice que sintio mucho 
d tan grandes sefiores y afiade: "fue esta muerte que les 
dieron muy ynjustamente E pare^io mal A todos los q yba- 
mos." Eran entonces las carnestolendas de 1525. 

Llega Cort6s & las tierras de los mazateca, y despu^ 
de pasar por dos pueblos, uno situado sobre una isleta y 
otro junto & un lago de agua dulce, penetra en Tayasal. 
Poco adelante, Bernal principia d sentirse muy enfermo 
''de calenturas y del gran sol q se me avia Entrado en la 
cabe^a y en todo El cuerpo:" asf tiene, no obstante, que 
cruzar la penosa sierra de los Pedemales, no muy alta, pe. 
ro cuyas piedras "cortaban como navajas." Prente & Tay- 
ca, detiene al ej^rcito, durante tres dias, un rfo "q bien se 
oya a dos leguas," y encima del cual levanta Cortes una 
puente semejante & la construfda en Ayagualulco, puentes 
que subsistfan al cabo de muchos afios para admiracidn de 



xzzra 
loB caminanteB, que soUan decir: ''aqui son Iob pnentee 
de cortee como si dixeran las columnas de Ercoles.'^ 

Nuevamente se dej6 aentir el hambre, y de an modo tal, 
qne el autor nunca habfa suf rido tanto dolor en sn corazdn 
como esta veZ| qne ''no tenia q comer ni q dar A mi gente 
y Estar con calenturas.'^ Gort^ le ordena, sin embargo, 
qne saiga & bnscar bastimento para el ej^rcito, y el antor 
obedece sobreponi^ndose & sns graves males; gniado por su 
experiencia y sagacidad, no tarda macho en hallar galli- 
nai9, maiz, frijoles y ''otras cosas de legambres/' con que 
se abastecen por lo pronto todoe los soldados. 

Van d Tania, pneblo ceroado de rios y arroyos, y del coal 

no pneden salir, porque seganda vez pierden el camino; 

Cort^ envfa A varios castellanos A que lo descubran, pero 

sin logro ni efecto. Preciso es que confiera la comisidn al 

autor, A pesar de su enfermedad: despu^s de Dios, en 6\ 

''tenia confianfa q traeria rrecavdo." Y como lo trae, po- 

aitivamente, pueelogra encontrar el camino que se debia se- 

guir, Gort^ le manifiesta profunda gratitud y le hace bue- 

nosprometimientos: "yo os epefio [ledice] estas e fuero sub 

. barbas q yo tenga q^ con v*s*/' El conquistador Uega, por 

. fin, con su enorme ej^rcito A Ocoliztle, pueblo inmediato A 

Naco, donde esperaba combatir A Grist6bal de Olid: hasta 

. entonces sabe que ^te habia sido degollado desde hacla 

tiempo por Gil Gonzalez de Avila y Francisco de las Caaas. 

- Empero, antes de regresar A M6xico, quiere dejar afirma* 

' do su dominio en aquella lejana comarca: su desmedida 

ambici6n le hacla ver pequefLo el vasto territoriode la Nue- 

va Espafia. Funda, asf, la villa de la Natividad, "adonde 

aora llaman puerto de caballos/^ y obUga A los naturales, 

que se habian remontado, A que vuelvan A poblar A Naco. 

En tal estado las cosas, se reciben noticias de Mexico de 

c6mo el factor Gonzalo de Salazar, despu6s de hacer correr 

la voz de que Cortes y sus soldados eran muertos, recogid 

los bienes 6 indios de ellos para repartirlos entre bus adic- 



xxacvm 

to8, y orden6, aderods, & las esposas que resultaban viadas, 

que rezaran por las dnimas de sua maridos y que luego pro- 

cedieran & * 'casarse de nuevo, y avn lo Enbio a dezir a gua- 

gaqualco e a otras villas:" per cierto que la mujer de Alon- 

80 Ydfiez, vecina de Mexico, acato la orden sin vacilacidn 

ysecasoprecipitadamente. Ahorabien, mientrasque todos 

^ los BoldadoB se indignan y se exaltan, como era natural, y se 

• aprestan A volver violentamentedla Nueva Espafia para re- 

.' cuperar & sus esposas, indios y bienes, y aun maldicen & 

Cort6s y & Salazar ''y se nos saltavan los coraQones de co- 

,raje;" Cort6s, antes en6rgico, pronto y audaz hasta la te- 

meridad, hoy d6bil, irresoluto y temeroso, se limita d Uorar 

desconsoladamente y & encerrarse largas horas en su cuarto, 

no permitiendo que nadie le vea: el exceso de poder habfa 

enervado su carActer. Cuando sale, al fin, de su aposento, 

todos sus soldados ' *a vna le diximos y rrogamos q luego 

se Enbarcase en tres nabios q alii estavan y q nos fuesemos 

a la nueva espafia y El nos rrespondio muy amorosam*** o 

hijos conpafieros myos q veo por vna parte aql mal honbre 

del factor qsta muy poderoso y temo desq sepa qstamos en 

el puerto nos haga otras desverguengas y atrevim'^s mas de 

lo q a hecho o me mate o me ahoge o Eche preso Asi a mi 

- como a vras personas:" las cuantiosas riquezas que ahora 

^ posef a Cortes, le hacfan amar demasiado la vida. 

Abandona egofstamente al grueso del ejercito y se hace 
A la mar con unos cuantos servidores. El autor le habfa 
rogado muy encarecidamente que lo Uevara eon 61: tftulos 
sobrados tenia para solicitar esta y otras mercedes mis gran- 
des; pero Cort6s, que habia desoido siempre & la gratitud, 
le dej6 allA para que viniese por tierra. 

Y por tierra vino, en efecto, sufriendo nuevamente coti- 
dianas penalidades y teniendo tambi^n que luchar con los 
indfgenas. Pas6porManiani, Oholulteca-malalaca, losCha- 
parrastiques, Cuzcatlan 6 Cascacatan, cuyos habitantes le 
hirieron de un flechazo, Petapa, Guatemala, 01int6pec, So- 



conusco, Tehuantepec, Oaxaca y Mexico. Entro en la capi- 
tal a principioB de 1527, despu^ de un trabajoBisimo viaje 
de ''mas de doB afLoB e tres meses," durante el cual habia 

.servido en todo *'muy bien e lealmente,'^ sin Uevar **8ueldo 
ni otro partido alguno." Lleg6 pobre, adeudado y con la 

• ropa rota. Andr^B de Tapia le hoBped6 en bu casa y Gon- 
zalo de Sandoval le envi6 veBtidos para que Be ataviase ' '£ 
oro e cacao para gastar.'' 

A la Baz6n, gobemaba la Nueva Espana Marcos de Agai- 
lar, 4 quien el autor Buplic6 lediesen indios en Mexico, por- 
que loB de Coatzacoalcos '^no Eran de provecho.'^ Aguilar 
le hizo linicamente buenos prometimientoB, alegando que 
aun no recibla poder para repartir indios. 

En el mismo ano sucedid d Aguilar, Alonso de Estrada, 
primero en compafifa de Sandoval y luego solo, cuya go- 
bemacidn £u6 muy funesta para el autor: bajo ella, Balta- 
sar Osorio y Diego de Mazariegos le desposeen ' 'por f uer- 
za" de BUS encomiendas de Micapa, Tlapa y de Chamnla, 
con el fin de agregarlas & las nuevas villas de Chiapas y de 
Tabasco* Imposibilitado el autor ' 'para tratar pleitos con 
doB villas, " ocun-e & Estrada en demanda de justicia y ob- 
tiene de el, con fecha 3 de abril de 1528, la encomienda '^de 
los pueblos de Gualpitdn 6 Micapa, que son en las sierras 
de Cachulco, que soUan ser sujetos & Cimatdn, e de Popo- 
loatdn en la provincia de Citla." El autor no qued6, sin 
embargo, satisfecho, debido d que estos pueblos eran de 
poca imiortancia y no le compensaban ni con mucho la p6r* 
dida de Tlapa, que tenia ''mas de mil casas," y la de Cha- 
mula, que contaba ' 'mas de cuatrocientas e las estancias 
mas de docientas/' 

A fines del repetido ano de 1528 sustituyd A Estrada la 
1^ Audiencia, que quiso proceder, acto continuo, al repar- 
timiento perpetuo de los indios, y orden6, con tal objeto, 
a las ciudades y villas pobladas por castellanos, nombraran 
procuradores que viniesen d la capital. La disposici6n no 



XL 

podfa ser mds oportuna ni mds liBonjera para Bernal, que 
pudo creer entonces f undadamente iban & cesar muy pron- 
to BUS trabajoB y pobreza. Sale, pueB, de aqui violentamen- 
te con direccion & Espiritu Santo; consigue que Iob vecinos 
de la villa le confieran su poder, y vuelve en seguida & M6- 
xico. Sin embargo, el decantado repartimiento no se reali- 
z6, y lofl oidores, lejoB de favorecer & Bernal, le encarcela- 
ron dos veces por motivoH baladieB, juntamente con otroB 
viejoB conquiBtadoreB. Tuvo al fin que regresar & Coatza- 
.coalcoB, perBuadido de que no alcanzarfa protecci6n de la 
.1^ Audiencia, y que reBignarse & vivir alld "en medio de 
la necesidad," pero manteniendo ''bu mucha honra, vi6n- 
doBele Biempre vivir muy bien y Bin conoc^rsele vicio algu- 
no,*' y gozando, justamente, * 'de muy buena f ama, " 

DepueBta la 1^ Audiencia haBta el meB de enero de 1531, 
aBumen el mando Iob rectos miembros de la 2^, quienes, sa- 
bedores de los m6ritoB del autor, le nombran visitador ge- 
neral de CoatzacoalcoB y de Tabasco y le encomiendan la 
descripcidn de ambas poblaciones, cargos que desempefla 
con acierto en compafifa tdel beneficiado Benito L6pez. 
Alentado Bernal con estas distinciones y fiado en la recti- 
tud de la 2^ Audiencia, ocurre & ella para que le de algu- 
nos pueblos de indios en resarcimiento de los que ' 'le to* 
maron por fuerza;" pero los oidores le dicen que "si no 
viene de fispana de su Magestad mandado que se lo den, 
que no lo pueden dar." El afio de 1585, lleg6 acA el 1®' Vi- 
rrey don Antonio de Mendoza; Bernal ocurri6 tambi^n & 61 
con igual demanda, y recibi6, asimismo, una negativa and- 
loga. 

Empero, si la adversidad y la decepci6n nodejaban nun- 

. ca de acechar y de herir al autor, 6ste, en cambio, jamds se 

. rindi5 & bub golpes y supo siempre, por lo contrario, con- 

' servar ent^ras bus energlas. Precisamente debe de haber 

sido hacia 1535, cuando d pesar de que frisaba ya en los 43 

afioB y se encontraba "muy trabajado y necesitado," se ca- 



XLI 

86 con Teresa Becerra, hija mayor legftima del OapitAn 
Bartolom6 Becerra, conquistador de Guatemala y su pri- 
mer alcalde ordinario. De este matrimonio tuvo Bemal va- 
ries hijos 6 hijas, siendo el primero Francisco, que naci6 
nn ano despu^s. 

Bemal habfa tenido anteriormente otros hijos en una in- 
dfgena, quizd la muy hermosa que pidi6 d Moteculi25oma 
por conducto del paje Orteguilla. Baltasar Dorantes de Ca- 
rranza conoci6 6. '*Diego Diaz del Castillo, hijo natural y 
mestizo" de Bemal, ^ y Felipe II habla en c6dula real de 
unos hermanos de este Diego. ^ 

Se muestra elautor un excelente padre de familia; la ma- 
yor, la linica preocupaci6n de toda su vida, fu6 no tener 
recursos con que asegurar el porvenir de su esposa 6 hijos: 
habla de esto constantemente en todas sus cartas y tam- 
bi6n en la Historia Verdadera. 

Gomo los trabajos de Bemal crecian necesariamente con 
su nueva familia y sabfa por triste experiencia que nada 
debfa esperar de los gobemantes de la Nueva Espafia, re- 
suelve ir & la Corte & solicitar justicia de los seflores del 
'Real Consejo. Cortes y el Virrey le dan para ellos cartas de 
recomendaci6n, con las cuales y una probanza de sus m6- 
ritos y servicios, Uega k Espafia, hacia 1540. Una vez alld, 
presenta en forma su demanda; los sefiores del Real Conse- 
jo ordenan que se corra traslado al fiscal. Lie. don Juan 
de VillaloboB, y 68te pide lisa y llanamente, por motives que 
ignoramos, que no se le provea cosa alguna, porque "no 
•habiasido tal conquistador como decfa." El Fiscal lasti- 
.maba doblemente al autor, puesto que, & la vez que desco- 
noclasus servicios prestados durante tantos afios con fati^ 
'gas angustiosas y peligros repetidos de muerte, le trataba 



1 Stimaria Relaci6n de las cosas de la Nneva Espafia [1604.] Mexi- 
co. 1902. Pfig. 169. 

2 Nobiliario citado, p6g. 69. 

Bemal Diaz del Caatlllo.— 6* 



XUI 

paladinamente de falsario, d 61 que vefa y proclamaba & la 
verdad como "cosa bendita y sagrada." Este desengano 

• fu6, sin duda algana, el mds doloroso de cuantos sufrio el 
autor. For fortuna, los seiiores del Real Consejo no tuvie- 
ron en cuenta el pedimento del fiscal al resolver el asunto, 

.y proveyeron un auto, el 15 de abril de 1541, consultando 
Be diera al autor cedula real para el Viirey de la Nueva Es- 
pafia d fin de ' 'que se inf orme de la calidad y la cantidad de 
los pueblos que al dicho Bernal Diaz le f ueron dados 6 tu- 
vo 6 posey6 y le f ueron quitados para la poblaci6n de Chia- 
pa 6 Tabasco, y le d6 en recompensa dellos otros pueblos 
tales y tan buenos en la misma provincia, para que se apro- 
veche dellos por el tiempo que fuere'la voluntad de su Ma- 
gestad." La cedula se extendi6 dos raeses despu^s, junta- 
mente con otra que en iguales t^rminos vino dirigida & 
Pedro de Alvarado, gobernador de Guatemala, y que soli- 
cit6 el autor con la mira de obtener los nuevos pueblos en 
cualquiera de ambas provincias, donde mds pronto se pu- 
diese. 

Provisto de una y otra c6dulas, regreso inmediatamente 
al Nuevo Mundo. Nada alcanz6 en la Nueva Espaiia, pero 
habiendo pasado & Guatemala, el Lie. Alonso Maldonado, 
que la gobemaba por muerte de Alvarado, le encomend6 
los pueblos de Zacat6pec, Joanagacapa y Misten, que eran 
manifiestamente '*de poco provecho," y le prometi6 "que 
habiendo otros de calidad se los darfa 6 depositarfa/' Co- 
mo el ofrecimiento no lleg6 4 realizarse, Bernal tampoco 
sali6 de su vida de miseria. 

Sin incidentes algunos notables, al menos que sean co- 

.nocidos de nosotros, corri6 el tiempo hasta el ano de 1550, 

' en que Bernal fu6 Uamado de Espafia para que asistiera & 
la Junta de Valladolid con el cardcter de ' 'conquistador 
mas antiguo de la nueba espana." Va alU, concurre A la 

•Junta y vota por el repartimiento perpetuo de los indios, 
no obstante haber oido las humanitarias y persuasivas ra- 



zones alegadas en contra por el excelso don fray Bartolo- 
.ine de laB Casas y bub dignos compafieros fray Rodrigo de 
Labrada y fray TomAs de San Martin: tenia que convencer- 
le m^ su propia pobreza, 

Utiliz6 Bemal su breve permanencia en la Corte, const- 
guiendo que por cedula real, fecha 1^ de diciembre de 1550, 
se ordenara al Lie. Alonso L6pez Zerrato, Presidente de la 
Audiencia de Guatemala, cumpliera 6 hiciera guardar la 
anterior cedula extendida en 1540. 

El 1^ de septiembre de 1551 exhibid el autor su nueva 
cedula ante el Lie. L6pez Zerrato, quien desgraciadamen* 
te no la cumplio, 4 pesar de haberia tornado en sus manos, 
el propio dia, y visto y puesto sobre su cabeza, segiin cos- 
tumbre, manifestando que la obedecia y campliria. Deci- 
mos que no la cumpli6, porque un afio mds tarde Bemal 
escribia d su Majestad que dicho licenciado s61o cuidaba de 
dar encomiendas ' 'a sus parientes e criados y amigos' ' sin ha- 
cer caso alguno de los conquistadores que lo hablan gana- 
do "con sus sodores y sangre;" por lo cual rogaba el autor 
A 8U Majestad fuese servido de mandar que se le adraitiera 
*'en su Real casa en el numero de sus criados. '' Esta siiplica 
indica que Bernal no abrigaba ya ningunas esperanzas de 
mejorar aqui su misera suerte. Aqui permaneci6, sin em- 
bargo, porque tampoco logr6 ser admitido en el niimero de 
los servidores de su Majestad. 

Ahora bien, si no le habia sido posible prosperar durante 
8U juvefttud y edad madura, menos le era hoy que entraba 
en la ancianidad; vemos, pues, como cosa natural, y aiin 
esperada, que escriba & don fray Bartolom6 de las Casas, 
con fecha 20 de febrero de 1558, que continuaba *'rauy al- 
canzado por tener probe tasacion." ^ Mucho debla consolar- 



1 CJomo el antor aliadia entonces que estaba "mny cargado de hi- 
joB e de nietos" y que tenia "muger moza." no as aventurado pensar 
qne habla contraldo recientemente segundas mipcias: nadie admiti- 



le segnir tambi^n estimado y respetado en Guatemala. No 
habfa dejado de ser regidor; acababan de elegirle, ese mis- 
mo ano, "fiel y executor," y fu6 designado, uno antes, pa- 
ra que sacase el Pend6n en la fiesta de Santa Cecilia, honor 
que se le volvio & conferir en 1560, con motivo de la fiesta 
del Ap6stol Santiago. ^ El carifio y consideraci6n que tu- 
vieron para Bernal todas las personas que le trataron, se 
debian Asu "buena conversaci6n, " nobles sentimientos y 
principalmente d que, en medio de la necesidad, supo vi- 
vir siempre con * 'mucha honra. ' ' 

Asf, pues, bastante pobre, si bien muy querido y consi- 
derado, se consagr6 & escribir su Hiatoria Verdadera cuan- 
do frisaba en los setenta y tantos anos de edad; sin temer 
& nadie; persuadido de que en el mundo no se registraba 
hecho mds hazafioso que la Oonquista, ni existf an hombres 
mis heroicos que los conquistadores; conforme con no ha- 
ber recibido la remuneraci6n que justamente merecia; libre 
de pesimismos, rencores y remordimientos; perfectamente 
tranquila su conciencia; con una memoria privilegiada y 
una inteligencia excepcional en su pleno vigor. Interrum- 
pla de tarde en tarde su trabajo para visitar los pueblos de 
su encomienda, acompafiado d voces de amigos. Ni el viaje 
ni el cambio de clima quebrantaban su salud; 61 mismo nos 
dice que todavla en aquel tiempo no usaba cama, por cos- 
tumbre adquirida desde la Conquista, ni tampoco se podfa 



r6 que conviene & una abuela el calificativo de moza, derivado, como 
es Babido, de mustus (nueyo, frescx)) y cuyo masculino quiere dezir, 
en bnen romance, "quasi mocho, porq es como vna planta, q avn no 
ha crecido todo lo que ha de crecer." (Sebasti&n de Cobamibias Oroz- 
co. Tesoro de la lengva castellana 6 espafiola. Madrid. 1611. Pol. 551 
vto.) Empero, la caeBti6n no quedarA resuelta, si no se descubren an- 
tes nuevos docimientos que la ilustren: en Historia nada puede susti- 
tuir & los documentos, ni atin las argumentaciones mto vigorosas y 
mejor fundadas. 
1 Garcia Pel^z, obra citada, tomo II, p^. 223-27. 



XLV 

dormir si antes no se paseaba ' ' vn rrato al sereno y esto sin 
poner En la cabe9a cosa ningana de bonete ni pafio y gra- 
cias a dios no me haze mal.'' Con todo, nos dice tambi6n, 
no sin exageraci5n quizd, que para entonces habfa ''perdi- 
do la vista y El oyr." 

Llevaba escrito poco de la JBistoria Verdadera^ cuando 
. llegaron d sus manos las crdnicas compuestas por Paulo 
.Griovio, Francisco L6pez de Gomara y Gonzalo de Ulescas;^ 
no bien comenz6 6, leerlas ''y entendi, y ui de su poligia y 
estas mis palabras tan groseras y sin primor/^ renunci6 k 
continaar su Historia Verdadera; pero pasada la primera 
impresi6n, tom6 & leerlas y pudo entonces darse cuenta de 
que no decian verdad ni en sus principios, ni en sus me- 
dios, ni en sus cabos, por lo cual resolvi6 de una manera 
• definitiva proseguir su obra. Probablemente no sucedia es- 
to antes de 1566, porque Bernal ignoraba el latin, y no pu- 
do, por lo mismo, conocer la cr6nica de Giovio sino hasta 
que public6 Baeza su traducci6n al castellano. De cualquier 
.modo que sea, consta que, el ano de 1568, Bernal sac6 en 
. limpio la Historia Verdadera. 

No sabemos mis acerca de su vida, 
Unicamente nos es dado agregar que el autor murid en 
. Guatemala hacia 1581, ^ pobre como habla vivido, sin dejar 
i su numerosa familia ningunas riquezas, salvo '*su verda- 
dera y notable rrela§ion," que era, no obstante, el mejor 
. titulo de gloria para sus descendientes, porque ella ence- 
rraba su limpio nombre de conquistador honrado 6 historia- 
dor genial. 



1 La obra de Giovio fti6 publicada en latin desde 1550-52, y tradu- 
cida al castellano por Gaspar de Baeza, el afio de 1566; Gomara im- 
primi6 sn cr6nica en 1552-53, 6 lUescas la suya en 1564. Las tres al- 
canzaron pronto varias ediciones. 

2 V^ase el ntLm. 1 del Ap^ndice. 



XLVI 



§ II.-SU CARACTER. 




I es muy exigua nuestra informaci6n respecto de la 
vida de Bemal, lo es mucho m^ relativamente 4 
611 cardcter. Para reconstruir este, s61o dispone- 
mos de unos cuantos detalles aislados que encierra la His- 
toria Verdadera. Debemos, sin embargo, conformarnos con 
ellos, si queremos conocer al autor de una raanera completa. 
Indudablemente que nos importa saber qui^nes f ueron sus 
padres, qu6 lugares recorri6 y cudles hechos ejecut6; pero 
no nos interesa menos descubrir sus sentimientos, ideas, 
concepciones generales acerca de la humanidad y creencias 
religiosas: su alma, en una palabra. Consiguientemente, 
procuraremos establecer, hasta donde nos lo permita la es- 
casa cosechaque alcancemos en la Historia Verdadera^ cud- 
les f ueron los sentimientos, cudl la instruccidn, cudl lafilo- 
soffa, cudl la religiosidad del autor. 

Desde luego, nos induce A pensar que recibi6 en el seno 
de su familia una educaci6n moral, sana y solida, el he- 
cho de que, reci6n venido k America, no se quedd ' 're9a- 
gado En los muchos vicios que aula en la ysla de cuba,'' d 
pesar de las necesarias incitaciones de su plena juventud. 

Como hombre, el autor Uenaba la condicidn primera de 
todas las virtudes, porque sabia amar d su pr6jimo. Le ve- 
mos, de esta suerte, tratar con llaneza d sus iguales, no 
despreciar d sus inferiores ni envidiar d sus superiores. 

Bernal casi nunca menciona d un companero suyo, ca- 
pitdn 6 simple soldado, sin tributarle algiin elogio, com- 
placi^ndose mds en hablar de las cualidades que de los 



XLvn 
defectos, los cuales sdlo apunta en caso de necesidad im- 
preBcindible. For esto le olmos Uaroar f recuentemente & los 
conquistadores de la Nueva Espafia buenos jinetes, 6 pres- 
tos en las armas, bien proporcionados, pulldos, francos, 
valerosos, esforzados, principales, preeminentes, etc., y 
muy hermosas, 6 may honradas, d sus mujeres. Para bur 
amigos, Bemal era cariiloso en extremo y adicto hasla la 
abnegacidn; lloraba A Cristobal de Olea cerca de medio si- 
glo despu^ de muerto, y por acompafiar d Gonzalo de San- 
doval, renanci5 d una vida tranquila y d ricos pueblos de 
encomienda, prefiriendo exponerse & nuevos peligros y con- 
tinuar pobre y empefiado. 

A causa de que los naturales de America eran gente 
iddlatra y de civilizaci6n inferior A la de los castellanos, 
eetos, inclusive tal cual insigne prelado, les vieran comiin- 
mente como & seres '^mas semejantes A bestias feroces que 
d criaturas racionales, " ^ y es lo cierto que les estimaron 
*^en menos que d bestias," ^ pues ''eran tenidos los perros 
en harta mds estima que no los indios, e mds valfan,''' 6 
Begun manif estaba el Virrey don Martin Enrfquez & su su- 
cesor don Lorenzo Sudrez de Mendoza, ''mas cuidado tienen 
de SUB perroB que no dellos. " ^ En general, los espafioles 



1 El Obispo don fray Juan de Quevedo. En fray Pablo de la Pu- 
risima Conoepci6n Beaumont. Cr6nica de la Provincia de los Santos 
Ap6etole8 8. Pedro y 8. Pablo de Michoacta. Mexico. 1873-74. Tomo 
II,p6g.l28. 

2 Pray Toribio de Benevente 6 Motolinla. En Oolecci6n de Docu- 
mentos para la Historia de Mexico, publicada por Joaquin Garcia 
Icazbalceta. Mexico. 1858-66. Tomo I, p&g. 18. 

3 Carta que escribieron varios Padres de la Orden de Santo Do- 
mingo, residentes en la isla Espafiola, & Mr. de Xevres, con fecha 4 de 
juniode 1516. En Colecci6n de Documentos In6ditos relatives al 
descubrimiento, conquista y colonizaci6n de las posesiones espa&olas 
en America y Occeanla. Madrid. 1864-84. Tomo VII, p6g. 404. 

4 En Instmcciones que los Virreyes de Nueva Espafia dejaron & 
BUS sucesores. Mexico. 1873. Tomo I, p^. 57. 



xLvin 
de aquella 6poca, rudos y craeles por herencia, ignorantes 
y fanAticos por educaci6n, pensaban que sin pecar contra 
la humanidad ni contra Dios, podfan desposeer da bus bie- 
nes y tierras & los indios, quitarles & bus mujeres 6 hijos, 
' * matarlos, cautivarlos ; " ^ ' *no podia persuadirse que tenian 
alma racional, sino quando mucho, vn grado mas que mi- 
cos, o monas, y no formaban algunos escrupulo de cebar 
BUS perros con la came dellos, tratandolos como a puros 
animales." Asi se expresa un espafiol muy patriota, el re- 
verendo maestro fray Benito Pefialosa y Mondrag6n, en 
una obra que destind & encomiar entusiastamente & los de 
su raza. ^ Pues bien, Bernal fu6 resueltamente humano y 
caritativo para los indf genas. 8u rifia con Diego Godoy, 
escribano real, tuvo por origen haber exigido 6ste al capi- 
tAn Luis Marin que herrara & varias indias aprehendidas en 
Tecomayate y Atedpan; opiisose con energla el autor ale- 
gando que era una injusticia, porque se habia ofrecido de- 
volver esas indias & sus deudos, si venfan de paz, y los deu- 
dos estaban alii, confiados en la promesa; no cej6 Godoy; 
insistid el autor, y "tuvimos grandes debates y palabras y 
avn cuchilladas que Entranbos salimos heridos hasta q nos 
despartieron y nos hizieron amigos y el capitan luys marin 
Como Era muy bueno E no era mali§ioso E vio q no era 
justo hazer mas de lo q le pedi por md mando q diesen to- 
das las mugeres y toda la mas gente qestaba presa a los 
ca§iqs de aqllos pueblos y los dexamos en sus casas y muy 
de paz.'' Nombr6se A Bernal, afios mAs tarde, juntamente 
con el beneficiado Benito L6pez, depositario del hierro de 

• marcar esclavos perteneciente & la villa de Espfritu Santo: 
mas como los vecinos se daban mucha prisa para herrar in- 

. dios y lo hacian de una manera injustificada, *'muy secre- 



1 Carta citada de varies Padres dominicos, p6g. 401. 

2 Libre de las cinco excelen**" del espafiol que despveblan a Espa- 
fia para sv mayor potencla y dilatacion. Pamplona. 1629. Fol. 39 fte. 



XLtX 



lam® quebramos el hierro sin dar pte dello al alcalde mayor 
ni al cabildo;" los vecinos se enojaron en sumo grado, na- 

•tnralinente, luego que lo supieron: decfan ^ Bemal y 6. 
Benito que eran "malos rrepublicanos, " porque noayuda- 
ban A la villa y ' 'que mere§iamos ser apedreados y todo lo 
que dezian nos reyamos y pasabamos por ello y nos pregia- 
bamoB de aber hecho tan buena obra." Bemal trataba de 
una manera inmejorable & los indios de los pueblos de su 

. encomienda, por lo cual "en todas partes*' le loaban, y aun 
los religiosos dominicos, tan severos y exigentes, le ponian 

. de modelo d los demds encomenderos: se podfa afirmar que 
no Iiabia otros pueblos donde los indios recibieran mejor 
trato ni pagaran menos tributo. Digno era, en verdad, el 
autor, de pertenecer al selecto gremio del inraaculado don 
fray Bartolom6 de las Casas, '*padre y defensor destos pro- 
ves yndios,'' como el mismo Bemal le llamaba. 
• Para no mutilar la verdad hist6rica, se vi6 obligado el 
autor d hablar de los def ectos de Cortes, que tanta influen- 
cia tuvieron en la eonquista de la Nueva Espana. Soils, 
que deliberadamente queria hacer apologia y no historia, y 
que por lo mismo solo aceptaba las cualidades, os6 escribir 
que la ruin pasidn de la envidia andaba muy descubierta 
entre los renglones del libro de Bemal: Sol is trataba asl de 
nuMcar la Historia Verdadera^ & fin de que no f uese con- 
trapuesta d su propia obra. Repitieron el doloso cargo va- 
rios de los escritores que nada pueden decir que no este di- 
eho. Mas basta hojear la Historia Verdddera para saber que 
Bernal no s61o aplaude el nombramiento de capitdn que Ve- 
Idzquez confiri6 d Cortes y que redund6, dice, en bien de 
■la fe cristiana yservicio de su Majestad, sino que manifies- 
ta ''q nunca capitan fue obedesgido con tan to acato y pun- 
tualidad En el raundo:" "todos nosotros pusieramos la 
vida por El;" advierte que Cortes lo merecia, porque "do- 

•quiera que ponia la mano se le hazia bien," aparte de que 

• '*en todays las batallas se hallava de los primeros," y reco- 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo.— 7» 



noce, sin reticencias, que A Cortes se debW ''todo honor y 
prez y honrra de todas las ba tall as y vencim^'s hasta q ga- 
namos esta nueva espafia; como se suele dar En castilla A 
los mny nombrados Capitanes y como los rroinanos daban 
trinnfos a pompeyo y a Julio §esar y a los gipiones mas dl- 
no es de loor nro cortes q no los rromanos." Seraejantes 

"^ encomios son hijos de una admiraci6n sincera, nunca de la 
ruin pasi6n de la envidia. 

Si juzgamos ahora & nuestro autor en su carrera militar, 
le hallaremos adicto siempre d su rey e invariablemente fiel 

. A sus jefes. Razon tenia Cortes para elogiarlo por la eon- 
ducta que habia observado durante la conquista de la Nue- 
va Es{)a£ia, "como en la ida que hize a Honduras y en Gua- 
timala y en otras muchas provincias," pues, segiin hemos 
visto, repetidas ocasiones sobresali^ el autor en el cumpli- 
miento de sus deberes y evidenci6 su valentfa con las gra- 
ves heridas que recibi6 de los indfgenas. Aun podemosde- 
cir que rayaba en la exageraoion su celo de buen soldado. 
Cuando acompafi6 d Cortes A auxiliar d los naturales de 
Chalco, le fu6 mandado que asaltara, en uni6n de sus com- 
pafieros, un gran penol donde se habian hecho f uertes mu- 
chos guerreros mexica; obedeci6 al punto el autor, comen- 
zando & subir & la cabeza de los asaltantes; las solas piedras 
que desde la cima bajaban con f uerza irresistible, mataron 
luego d cuatro castellanos y descalabraron 6 hirieron A los 
demds, lo cual obligo d Bemal d hacer alto y d refugiarse 
en una cavidad que cerca de 61 estaba; cuid6 entonces de 
gritar al capitdn Pedro Barba que marchaba atras; sefior 
capitdn, no suba, no suba adelante, no sea que vuelva ro- 
dando; of endi6se Barba, que era sin duda bastante quis- 
quilloso, y contest6con desdenoso enfado: eso no habia de 
decir sino ir adelante; muy lastimado Bernal, replied al 
momento: pues veamos como sube adonde yo estoy ; y toda- 
via trep6 mucho mds arriba; en aquel instante soltaron los 
mexica una represa de piedras que bajando con violencia 



u 
estrepitosa hirieron 6. Barba y inataron & uno de bus solda- 
dos. Barba no insistid ya en subir. 

Aunqiie exageradamente celoso de su buen nombre de 
soldado, el autor jamds llega d manif estarse f anf arr6n ; al 
contrario, confiesa Hin empacho que antes de entrar en las 

. batallas se le "ponia vna como grima y tristeza En el cora- 
§on y ayunaba vna vez o dos" y que aun le '*tenblava El 

•cora§on porq temia lamuerte." 

Lo que mis caracteriza & Bemal es su ingenua franque- 
za, que asl le hace confesamos sus grandes pavores como 
aseguranioB que fu6 uno de los mds distinguidos soldados 
de Cort^. Muchos criticos rigoristas ban tornado pie de es- 
to ultimo para acusar al autor de inmodesto y vanidoso, y 
cousiguientemente, para reprenderle con excesiva severi- 
dad. NosotroB pensamos que si acaso Bernal cometi6 am- 
bos pecados, lo hizo sin dolo, con el inocente fin de pro- 
porcionarse (muy de tarde en tarde por cierto), pequefias 
satisfacciones que & nadie herian ni tampoco descansaban 
sobre la mentira. En efecto, dista mucho *1 autor de cau- 
sar el men or raal cuando fntimamente convencido escribe, 
un tanto ufano, que no le contaminaron los grandes vicios 
que reinaban en la isla de Cuba; que 61 tuvo siempre "§e- 
lo de buen soldado;" que se cont6 entre los doce confiden- 
tes de Cortes, & quienes ' 'da va dios grayias y buen Conse- 
jo para aconsejar q Cortes hiziese todas las Cosas muy bien 
hechas;" que ''si se ynprime [la Hiatoria Verdadera] des- 
que la vean E oygan la daran fee verdadera y escure§era 
las lisonxas quescribieron los pasados," etc. Solfa inspirar 
d Bemal profeclas intachables su clarfsimo juicio. 

Los primeros de los crfticos rigoristas d que antes nos re- 
ferimos, fueron los dos licenciados guatemaltecos que pi- 
dieron prestada d Bernal la Historia Verdadera^ y que, 
despu^s de haberla leldo, le dijeron que les parecla que 
se alababa deraasiado en ella. El autor les hizo notar, ante 
todo, que cuanto manifestaba era verdad, y despu6s, las 



UI 

buenas razones que habfa tenido para hablar de su pereo- 
na. Alegaba con calor que no se le debla negar el derecho 
de dejar memoria propia para que bus descendientes pudie- 
ran decir: '*estas tierras vino a descobrir yganar mi padre 
a su costa y gasto la hazienda que tenia en ello y f ue en lo 
conquistar de los primeros;" recordaba que 61 estuvo "en 
muchas mas batallas y rrencuentros de guerra que dizen 
los escriptores que se hallo Julio §esar," 6 inferia de aqul 
que si 6ste escribi6 sus hechos, 61 podia, con mayor raz5n, 
escribir los suyos; advertla, en fin, que si quitara su honor 
& los otros soldados, fuera bien que se le reprendiera, mas 
como no hacfa esto ni faltaba en cosa alguna A la verdad, 
IpoT que no habia de hablar de sus buenos servicios? ' 'y avn 
con letras de oro auia de estar escripto [j]quisieran que lo 
digan las nubes o los pajaros que en aquellos tiempos pa- 
saron por alto y quisolo escriuir gomara ni yllescas ni cor- 
tes quando escriuia a su mag[?]" Entendemos que nada 
replicaron al autor los dos severos licenciados guatemalte- 
cos. 

Muy poco nos serd dado decir acerca de la instruccidn, 
filosoffa y religiosidad de Bernal, porque al escribir la 
Historia Verdadera^ se propuso linicamente narrar los su- 
cesos de la conquista de la Nueva Espana que 61 mismo ha- 

.bfa presenciado 6 que le constaban por haberlos oldo de 
testigos veraces, y para llenar su prop6sito no necesitaba 

' en manera alguna ostentar erudici6n, ni entrar en prof un- 

. das consideracionee filoa6ficas, ni hacer una profesi6n de fe, 
sino sencillamente referir lo que habia visto li ofdo. 

Con todo, la Historia Verdadera contiene algo que nos 
indica la ilustraci6n del autor. Aludimos &, su riqufsimo 
vocabulario y d la deliciosa f acilidad 6 indisputable pure- 

' za de su estilo, que, A pesar de sus descuidos frecuentes, no 
diecuerda del "comun hablar de castilla la vieja," segiin 
obsei-vaba desde 1568, el sabio letrado "muy rretorico" de 
Guatemala y lo confirmo la Real Academia Espanola, cer- 



Lm 
ca de do8 siglos despa^B, incluyendo & nneBtro autor en el 
catdlogo de autoridades de la lengoa. ^ Nos referimos tam- 
bi6n d los conocimientos que descubre Berual en liieratura 
e hiBtoria. Es innegable que habfa lefdo diversas obras 
literarias, inclusive, necesariamente, las de '^Amadis o ca- 
vallerias/' que & la 8az6n estaban muy en boga. Cita con 
sencilla naturalidad, hechos de Salom6n y de Jo86; de los 
Reyes de Egipto; de Alejandro, Anfbal y Mitrf dates; de los 
Scipiones que alcanzaron triunfos gloriosos, Pompeyo y Ju- 
lio Cesar, de quien transcribe algunas palabras; de Atila y 
Atalarico; de don Jaime de Arag6n, Gonzalo Femdndez de 
Cordova y Diego Garcia de Faredes. Conocia, en general, 
la conducta militar de los ''grandes n-eyes e balerosos Ca- 
pitanes,'' sobre todo, los nacidos en la Peninsula. Y res- 
pecto de la conquista de la Nueva Espafia, habia estudia- 
do y cotejado las relaciones de Cort6s, Giovio, Gomara, Las 
CasaB, lUescas y otros libros '^modemos y coronistas," f al- 
tos de originalidad, porque copiaban d Gomara. Podemos 
decir, por tanto, que Bemal era no s51o instruido sino aun 
medianamente erudito, y con mayor rasdn, si tenemos en 
cuenta su epoca. 

l^Yuto de su propia experiencia son ciertas reflexiones fi- 
los6ficas que formula de cuando en cuando sin uinguna 
presunci6n. Nos dice, asl, que ' 'la adversa fortuna buelve 
de presto su rrueda," y que el oro "quebranta pefias. " Por 
esto dej6 d su patria, confiado puntualmente en que la di- 
vinidad voluble le darfa acA el precioso metal, y seguro de 
Uegar d ser con 61 un gran sefior de poder omnimodo. Em- 
pero, no pensaba valerse de medios ilfcitos: sabla bien ''q 



1 Diccionario de la Lengoa Castellana. Madrid, 172&-39. Tomo I, 
p^. LXXXXI. El imi)ecable lingtlista don Juan Mir y Noguera, po- 
ne tambi^n & Bemal en la lista selecta de autores cl^sicos espafioles. 
y^ase su obra Prases de los Autores Cltoicos Espafioles. Madrid, 1899. 
P6g. XXXVL 



LIV 

el q con mal anda en peor acaba;" ademds, si es verdad 
que ambicionaba el oro, su ambici6n no excedla de la que 
por lo comun tiene todo mortal, antes bien era menor, por- 
que si escapo con vida durante la Noche Triste, se debid 
6, que no caminaba cargado de oro corao la mayor parte de 
los castellanos, que por el gran peso que Uevaban no pu- 
dieron huir: "yo digo que no tuve codi§ia, sino procurar 
de salvar la vida." La idea que se habfa formado de la hu- 
manidad, no era optimista ni pesimista; colocado en justo 
medio, no vefa iguales & todos los hombres ni en bondad ni 
en maldad, ni tampoco en inteligencia ni en estupidez: *'lo8 
cora^ones de los hombres [decfa] son de muchas calidades, 
, e pensamientos. " Persuadido de que el hombre se ama & si 
• mismo y no ama & su prdjimo, manif estaba que ' 'mal age- 
.no de pelo cuelga," y hacia notar que movidos por este 
egolsrao ansiamos, "desde lu§ifer," dominar A los demds, 
. y propendemos, muchas veces, d no dejar cosa que poda- 
mos infamar, que no infamemos. 
^ Finalmente, Bernal f u6 un creyente sincero que tenia 
• inconmovible fe en la omnipotencia divina. 8161 mismo ha- 
bia llegado & viejo, no obstante haber concurrido d mds 
batallas que Julio C^sar y haber quedado herido innume- 
rabies ocasiones y haberle "engarrafado" los indfgenas pa- 
ra sacriflcarlo & sus fdolos; se debfa tan s61o A que Nuestro 
Sefior Jesucristo y su bendita madre la Virgen Maria le 
habian querido salvar de tantos peligros con su infinita 
misericordia "pa q aga agora esta memoria o rrelayion, " 
que era la Historia Verdadera. Cumplfa Bernal fielmente 
con las prdcticas religiosas; rezaba, oia misa y tomaba par- 
te en las procesiones; antes de entrar en las batallas, ayu- 
naba *'vna vez o dos," como hemos dicho, y si durante ellas 
se vela en peligro de muerte, invocaba de manera muy 
fervorosa & las potencias celestiales para que le dieran es- 
fuerzo y no le dejaran morir. 

Sin embargo, la religiosidad del autor no lleg6 d dege- 



nerar en el grosero fanatismo que f u6 tan general entonces 
a SUB compatriotas, inclusive los que alcanzaron mayor cul- 
tura. El mentado bachiller Martin Fernandez de Enciso 
inanifeBtaba qne en el cabo de Santa Cruz, de la iela de 
Cuba, la Virgen Maria, muy hermosa y vestida enteramen- 
te de bianco, guerreaba contra los naturales y los ''mataua 
a todos d palos," ^ hecho sin precedente que fue prohijado 
por Fedro Mdrtir Angleria, sin que d ello se opusieran su 
excepcional inteligencia y refinada ilustracidn;^ el discreto 
fray Pedro Buiz Naharro afirmaba que el apdstol Santiago 
mat5 en el Perii mis indios 61 solo **que todos los espano- 
les juntos;"^ el muy erudito Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo 
y Valdes afLadfa que el caballo bianco que montaba el ani- 
moso Ap6stol, "con los pi6s 6 manos 6 con la boca mataba 
muchos [indios];" * para no multiplicar las citas, anadire- 
mos unicamente que el eximio Francisco Lopez de Gro- 
mara escribi6 que la Virgen Maria, con bus propias manos 
purisimas echaba d los naturales de la Gran Tenochtitlan 
"polvo por las (^aras y los cegaba:" ^ al decir del presbitero 



1 Smna de geographia. Senilla. 1530. Fol. 53, 29 (La 1* edici6n 68 
de 1519.) 

2 LibroB rarfsimos que 8ac6 del olvido, traduci^ndolos y d&ndolos & 
luz en 1892 el Dr. D. Joaquin Torres Asencio. Madrid. 1892. Tomo II, 
p6gs 131-36. (MArtir piiblic6 la V de bus D6cadas en 1511.) 

3 Belaci6n de los hechos de los espafioles en el Perti desde su des- 
cubrimiento hasta la muerte del Marqu6s Francisco Pizarro. En CJo- 
lecci6n de Documentos In^itos para la Historia de Espatka, ya cita- 
da, tomo XXVI, pdig. 245. (No hemos podido indagar la fecha exacta 
en que escribi6 fray Pedro; mas debe de haber sido & mediados del si- 
glo XVI 6 poco despu6s, porque pudo recoger sus noticias de labios 
de algunos de los conquistadores del Peni.) 

4 Historia General y Natural de las Indias, Islas y Tierra-Firme 
del Mar Oc^ano. Madrid, 1851-55. Tomo II, p6g. 511. (Oviedo impri- 
mi6 un Samario de esta obra en 1526.) 

5 Hispania Victrix. Primera y segunda parte de la Historia Gene- 
ral de las Indias. En Biblioteca de Autores Espafloies. Madrid. 
1851-80. Tomo XXII,. p&g. 364. (Dijimos ya que la 1* edici6n £u6 da- 
da ^ la estampa en 1552-53.) 



LVI 

don Joseph Mariano Estevan de Bezanilla Mier y Campa, 
la Virgen celestial hizo igual cosa en Zacatecas, donde una 
imagen saya, que recibfa culto en la iglesia parroquial, 
conservaba, todavfa hacia 1786, "en sus sacratisiraas ma- 
nos un pufio de tierra de color bianco apastillado, 6 como 
la canteria." * Bernal, por lo contrario, desechaba estos mi- 
lagros 5 hechos absurdos. Indudablemente que no concebla 
& la divinidad sino A imagen y semejanza del hombre, una 
vez que otra concepci6n ha sido siempre imposible para el 
torpe entendimiento de los mortales; pero queda tambi^n 
fuera de duda que Bemal no ponfa en la divinidad un odio 
tan injustificado ni una crueldad tan salvaje, como ence- 
rraban en ella casi todos los castellanos de la 6poca. Bernal, 
que se habla acuchilleado con Grodoy por defender d los in- 
dios, no podfa admitir que la divinidad manchara sus ma- 
nos con la sangre de estos infortunados. Niega, asf, rotun- 
damente, que durante la batalla de Tabasco se aparecie- 
ran los apdstoles Sefior Santiago ySenor Pedro para combatir 
dlos naturales; pudieraser que fueran, dice con fina ironfa, 
"E yo como pecador, no fuese dino de lo ver lo que yo en- 
ton§es vi y conosQi f ue a fran°° de morla En vn cavallo cas- 
tano, que venia juntamente con cortes-'' En cambio, Ber- 
nal aceptaba los milagros que obraba el poder divino en 
ayuda y socorro de los hombres; nos habla, por ejemplo, 
de "los Santos milagros que a hecho y haze de cada dia" 
Nuestra Sefiora de Guadalupe, esto es, de los beneficios que 
prodigaba la Virgen mexicana remediando las necesidades 
y aflicciones de cuantos la imploraban. Nos habrfa habla- 
do, adem^, desumaravillosaaparici6n, al indio Juan Die- 
go, si la hubiera conocido. Le habrfamos oido entonces ar- 
dientes f rases de admiraci6n y entusiasmo len loor de una 
Virgen que abandona su celeste corte para descender hasta 



1 Muralla Zacatecana. Mexico. 1788. P6g. 29. 



Lvn 
la tierra i defender y amparar A los indios, con su divino 
amor, por los siglos de los siglos, A pesar de sua decanta- 
das maldades, de su arraigada idolatrfa y de sub horren- 
dos sacrificios; Virgen sin igual de rostro inmensaroente 
tiemo, segiin convenla 6, la madre adoptiva de seres tan 
desventurados; que trala un corazcin liinpio de la m&s leve 
mdcula y desborddndose en 61 una piedad infinita; dulce- 
mente juntas las manos en sefial de que no venfa & dafiar 
& nadie, sino A dif undir enlre todos paz y concordia ; su 
porte sencillo y modesto, d fin de no lastimar la humildad 
y pobreza de eus nuevos hijos. Mas el autor no pudo tener 
noticia de esta visidn encantadora, hija del mis puro idea- 
lismo, porque consta que la Virgen ocult6 cuidadosamente 
su origen sobrenatural, y que no fu6 descubierto sino hasta 
1648 por el bachiller Miguel Sdnchez, aunque se ignora de 
qu6 modo lo descubrib. En la misma obra que Sanchez di6 
a la estampa, confesaba de la mejor buena fe el Lie. Luis 
Lazo de la Vega, vicario de la ermita donde era venerada 
la Virgen de Guadalupe: '*Yo, y todos mis antecessores he- 
mos sido Adanes dormidos posseyendo & esta Eva segunda 
en el Parayso de su Guadalupe Mexicano."^ Esta tardanza 
en conocer el prodigio celestial no era absolutamente ex- 
traordinaria, porque varios siglos antes, otra imagen de ori- 
gan milagroso, llamada tambi6n de Guadalupe, **la qual 
ee dize que hizo Sant Lucas, "^ habla permanecido en la pro- 
vincia de Extreraadura de Espafia, **detro de vna iglesia 
pequenuela, en forma de cueua," sin que nadie lo sospe- 
chara, desde el ano del Seiior de 714 hasta el "de mil y 



1 Imogen de la Virgen Maria Madre de Dios de Gvadalnpe, mila- 
grosamente aparecida en la Civdad de Mexico. 1648. Pol. 6." preli- 
minar. 

2 Pedro de Medina. Libro d'grandezas y cosas memorables de Es- 
pafia. Alcala de Henares. 1566. Fol. Ixxv vto. 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo.— 8* 



LVIII 

trecientos y treynta,"^ que fa6 cuando la paciente Virgen 
se resolvi6 A salir de su encierro y se le apareci6 con muy 
gran resplandor & un vaqaero tan humilde y virtuoso como 
nuestro indio Juan Diego. 

Resumiendo : Bemal Df az del Castillo tuvo exquisitos sen- 
timientos morales; ilustraci6n nada vulgar; concepeiones 
generalesacerca de la huraanidad bastante exactas, y creen- 
cias religiosas depuradas. Sus bi6graf os y crlticos incurren, 
por lo raismo, en gran error, cuando de manera undnime, sin 
la menor discrepancia, le Uaman, una y otra vez, rudo, in- 
culto e ignorante, ciegamente persuadidos de que debid ser, 
en verdad, un idiota y sin letraSy pues que 61 lo decfa, aser- 
ci6n que s61o prueba que el autor tambi^n fu6 modesto 
alguna vez. Se ha deprimido tanto d Bemal, como se ha 
ensalzado su Historia Verdadera. 




§ III.~SU OBRA. 



l,L c6dice original de la Historia Verdadera forma un 
gran volumen en fol.® de 297 hojas con pasta an- 
tigua de piel. Aunque su estado general es bas- 
tante bueno, tiene algunas hojas destruldas en parte, prin- 
cipalmente la primera y las liltimas. Toda la escritura, que 
llena ambos lados de las hojas, es de mano del autor, apa- 
reciendo en unas pdginas bien hecha y normal, y en otras 
descuidada 6 irregular: el autor no pudo tener el mismo es- 
tado de dnimo durante el largo tiempo que empled para 
escribir su obra. • 



1 Gabriel de Talavera. Historia de NvEstra SEnora de Gvadalvpe. 
Toledo. 1597. P6g8. 7 y 13. 



ux 

El objeto principal de 6Bta es la conquista ' - de la nneva es- 
pana y sns provincias y cabo de hondnras y de cuanto hay en 
eata tierra. " QuieneB tachan de inmodesto y vanidoso & Ber- 
nal, saponen que cuando emprendi6 la Hiatoria Verdadera 
tuvo por linico finhablar de su persona, Buposici6n Bobrema- 
nera grataita, porque el autor historia con f recuencia largOB 
anos Bin incluir uno 86I0 de bub hechoB perBonaleB. Principia 
Bu obra en el afio de 1514 y terminaen el de 1568. Ladivide 
en CCXIV capftuloB, Quiso cerrarla con el CCXII, al fin 
del cual puBO bu firma y rdbrica; pero cambi6 luego de pa- 
recer, y redactd doB nuevoB capftuloB, el mlBmo afio en que 
escribid el CCXII, que fu6 el ya dicho de 1568; peuBaba to- 
davia componer otro li otroB, pueB manifeBtaba al concluir 
el CCXIV: '*bien eB que diga en otro capftulo de Iob ar§o- 
biBX)OB y obiBpoB que a abido." De Buerte que Bemal no 
acab6 bu obra, & menoB que Be admita un extravio de Iob 
folioB finaleB, poco probable. El encuademador que empas- 
t5 el aut6graf o, entendf a poco de achaqueB paleograficoB, y 
coloc6^d lo liltimo la hoja que contiene la firma del autor. ^ 

Bemal no presumfa de Ber hombre de letras; confiesa bub 
eBcaBos conocimientoB en literaturay humildemente pide ex- 
cusaB por eBto d bub lectoreB: "perdonenme bub mds. que no 
lo Be mejor dezir.'' Erapero, bu frase eB todavfa hoy flufda, 
interesante y expreBiva, A peBar del inmoderado ubo de laB 
conJuncioneB copulativaB, de bu pobreza de imdgenes casi 
abBoluta, bub palabraB de ortografia variable,^ anticuadaB 



1 Este error no fa6 descubierto por el ^4nteligente amigo" que di6 
una noticia detallada del original 6 don Jos^ Maria de Heredia (obra 
citada, tomo IV, p6g. 402), ni tampoco por los Sres. Uribe y Gir6n, & 
qnienes el gobiemo de Guatemala enc5omend6 la reproducci6n £otogr&- 
fica del c6dice, y que 6 su yez dejaron como tiltima la hoja susodicha. 

2 Verbigracia: ohelula y cholula; leferras, becerras y bezerra; pedi- 
ces y predices; tanpanyquita, tanpaneguyta y panganequyta; xicoten- 
ga y zicotengo. 



6 incorrectas/ su puntuacion semiarbitraria, sus concordan- 
cias indebidas,^ sus extranas contracciones* y sus abreviatu- 
ras imprevistas/ El tono dorainante de su estilo esti deter- 



1 Dice asl: aguelo por abuelo, albanires por albafiiles, alguenas por 
halagttefias, anichila por aniquila, apechucar por apechugar, brosne 
por bronce, calavernas por calaveras, canpalas por campales, espesiva 
por expresiva, estante por instante, exito por Egiptb, frenesia por fre- 
nesl, galico por g&libo, gera por guerra, gevara por Guevara, manbla- 
les por manglares, mesivas por misivas, muyia por movla, omezilla por 
l&tima, parava jwr pintaba, pedricar por predicar, praticas por pl6ti- 
cas, sicoros por socorros, venencia por Venecia, yngrmnantico por ni- 
grom^ntico, zumarra por Zum&rraga, etc. 

2 Por ejemplo: Capitanes E esquadrones juntas: le enbiamoB, le 
quisiesemoB por les enviamos, les quisi^semos; ni vionen ninguno; 
quien fueron; se hallaron presente. 

3 Entre otras, acoger por 6, aooger, anpujones por & empujones, a 
ser por 6 hazer, a vido por ha habido, capitan andres por capitAn & An- 
dres, da caballo por de & caballo, dara algund por dar6 6 algtin, delua 
por de Ultla, desdel por desde 61, dese por de ese, desquestuvieren por 
desqae 6 desde que estuvieren, lo escrito por lo he escrito, maria rias 
por Maria Arias, junto a quel por A aquel, muchantidad por mucha can- 
tidad, nos por no os, Notando estado por he estado, pareger por parece 
ser, pasamoB embarcar por §, embarcar, qs por que es, qstaba por que 
estaba, seste por se est^, venido aquella isla por d aquella, ya Escrito 
por ya he escrito, yasido por ya asido, yatras por ya atrfis, yos por 
yo OS. 

4 De las numerosas que emplea, recordamos las siguientes: al.', al- 
teza, alcde, alcalde, alg"s, algunos, al.**, Alonso y Alvaro, a.**, Alonso, 
Alvaro y Antonio, aql, aquel, atrevimi^'s, atrevimientos, aud,6 audi, 
audiencia, aviam.°, aviamiento, avr, haber, balbde, Valverde, bastims, 
bastimentos, b.', bueno, br°% Bartolom6, bu.' bueno, bu. , buenos, ca, 
carta, cas, casas, cast.', Castilla, caxqte, casquete, conbsabamos, con- 
yersdbamos, c", consejo, contentam.'*, contentamiento, dcho, derecho, 
desq, desque, dham.**, derechamente, dho, dicho, ebiado, enviado^ 
fran.', Francisco, fu.', fuera, g.*, Gonzalo, gdor, Gobemador, gr, Ger6- 
nimo, gr.', Garcia, gras, gracias, grra, guerra, gu.', Guatemala, her."**, 
hermanos, hh, hechos, Jesuxpto, Jesucristo, Ju.^ Juan, juntam, jun- 
tamente, lie.', licencia, m, majestad, man 6 mao, mano, mcho, mucho, 
md, merced, m***, mando y mandado, min, Martin, ml, mal, mex.*, Me- 
xico, nro, nuestro, ofrecim"s, ofrecimientos, oze, onze, pa, para, p, Pe- 
dro, p.", Pedro y pueblo, pos, pesos, porq, porque, pres, procuradores, 



LXI 

xninado por una precision coDcisa asociada graciosamente & 
la rods perfecta naturalidad. Bemal no tiene Bensibilidad 
irritable que le ciegue, ni exceso de imaginacidn que le of us- 
que; BUS percepciones son por lo mismo extraordinariamente 
Claras: ve larealidad tal cual es, lo que poqulsimos hora- 
bres Uegan & lograr. Como por otra parte conserva sus re- 
cuerdos de una manera en extremo liel, nos impreeiona con 
BUS pdginas, tan vivamente, que podemos & veces formar- 
nos la ilusidn de que hace resurgir ante nosotros A la mis- 
ma realidad. 

Pero es el historiador y no el literato quien mAs nos in- 
teresa. 

Teniendo el autor un espfritu liberal y abierto, no se 
preocupa de preestablecer, ni roenos de comprobar, tesis al- 
gnna, sino solamente de ensenar c6mo fu^ conquistada la 
Nueva Espafia y cudl la conducta que posteriormente ob- 
servaron Cortes y sus principales capitanes. El m6todo que 
sigue es muy sencillo; se reduce & presentar los sucesos por 
• su orden cronoldgico y propio encadenamiento, sin solucion 
de continuidad, para que de este modo vaya imbfbita su 
explicacidn & su exposicidn; y ademds, d desechar las discu- 
siones innecesarias y las consideraciones meramente subje- 
tivas, que en lugar de ilustrar 6 robustecer la narracion, la 
oscurecen y debilitan. 



proTii.', provincia, psado, pasado, psentaba, presentaban, peo, paso y 
preso, pflonas, personas, pte, parte, ptir, partir, pn**, ptiblico, pu*B, pue- 
blos, q, 6 qbrar, qdar, qmar, qrer, etc., que, qnebrar, quedar, qnemar, 
querer, etc., ql, cual y que el, qta, cuarenta y cuenta, quado, cuando, 
qulqr, cualquier, rriqzas, riquessas, rrl, real, rro, Rodrigo, rrvsimo, re- 
verendlsimo, rrs, Rodriguez, s, sefior, sbbio, Boberbio, sbidor, servidor, 
secret.'', secretario, senia, sentencia, seniado, sentenciado, 8u;io, serri- 
cio, suido, servido, suy^s 6 svicioB, Bervicios, tes."", tesorero, tbeia, te- 
nia, tpo, tiempo, tratamos, tratamientos, trra, tierra, tzo, tesorero, v.', 
villa, V.' 8.', vuestra sefiorfa, vdad 6 vdd, verdad, vlid, Valladolid, v m, 
6 .V. m, vuestra merced, v.% vecino, vr, ver, vzo, vecino, xpual 6 xpval, 
Crist5bal, xpiano, cristiano, ynd.', indioB. 



Bemal, sin embargo, ensancha mucho su ^ra. Enemigo 
del siBtema de los cronistas de su 6poca, y de no pocos de 

. los historiadores contempordneos, que consiste en tratar 
linicamente de los hechos militares 6 politicos, habla, por 
lo contrario, de todo pormenorizadamente, lo raisrno de los 

. lugares que de los individuos, y esto d pesar de que se pro- 
pone circunscribirse d las ^'azanas de los q pasamos co 
Cortes/' ^ . 

Nos hace conocer exactamense la topografia general de 
la Nueva Espafia, sus itinerarios, caminos, calzadas cons- 
truldas & nivel y que no se torcfan "poco ni mucho," y ad- 
mirables ciudades, principalmente la Gran Tenoclititlan. 
Pinta las habitaciones de los indfgenas, muy encaladas y 
brillantes; sus anchos y pesados templos, bien proporciona- 
dos y majestuosos, todavfa m^ blancos y relucientes que 
las casas, tanto, que el sol los volvla de plata, y de tal mo- 
do limpios, "que no hallaran vna paja ny poluo;" sus ex- 
tensos, ricos y bien labrados palacios '*de canteria muy 
prima, y la madera de gedros, y de otros buenos arboles 
olorosos con grandes patios E quartos," y "muebles pre5ia- 
dos," '*Cosas muy de ver, y entoldados, Con paramentos 
de algodon;" sus hermosfsimos jardines y huertas, donde 
el autor paseaba embelesado, "que no rae hartava de 
mirar la diversidad de arboles, y los olores que cada vno 
tenia, y andenes Uenos de rrosas y flores, y muchos fruta- 
les y rrosales de la trra" y legumbres y yerbas medicinales 
y "vn estanque de agua duQe y otra cosa de ver, que po- 
dian entrar en el vergel grandes Canoas, desde la laguna, 
por vna abertura que tenian hecha, sin saltar en tierra, e 
todo muy encalado, y luzido, de muchas maneras de pie- 
dras y pinturas en ellas, que a via harto queponderar, y de 
las aves de muchas diversidades y rraleas que entravan en 
el estanque." 

Los espafioles no perciblan con pureza las voces de los 
idiomas americanos, debido & que estos eran de estructura 



LXin 
completamente distinta de la de bu propia lengua. Empero, 
Bemal se esf uerza por transcribir con fidelidad loB noinbres 
geogrdficos, y aun nos indica sue alteraciones viciosas; ci- 
ta, verbigracia, & Coadlabaca (Quauhndhuac), y dice: *'co- 
mandm^ corronpemos agora aqael bocable y le llamamos 
Cuemavaca;" distingue los lugares homdnimos y tambi^n 
loede nombres Bimplemente parecidos: esta ^'cachula q aqui 
nonbro no es la qsta gerca de mex*^;" "vno cb tustepeq e 
otro tutetepeq." 

De las personas, Bernal nos enBena los rostros y los ciier- 
poB y los corazones y pensamientos, segiin diria 61, con la 
particularidad de que igualmente tiene en cuenta d los cas- 
tellanos y personas principales, que & los indfgenas y gen- 
tecomiin. Retrataasf ^Motecuhzoma, Xicot^ncatl y Cuauh* 
t6moc, y no desdefla hacer bocetos de humildes soldados, 
como Heredia el viejo, que ^ 'tenia mala Catadura en la ca- 
ra y la barva grande y la cara medio acuchillada, E vn ojo 
tuerto, E coxo de vna pierna.'' El autor hace gradualmen- 
te la psicologfa de sus personajes, descubriendo paso d pa- 
80 los moviles de sus actos. Si escribe acerca de los caste- 
llanos, indica el lugar donde nacieron, sus nombres y apodos, 
cualidades distintivas, conducta militar, ocupaci6n posterior 
d la conquista, posici6n pecuniaria, domicilio liltimo y fa- 
Uecimiento; evita que el lector confunda d los individuos 
homdnimos: ''no digo maldonado el q fue marido de dofia 
maria del rrincon ni por maldonado El ancho ni otro mal- 
donado que se dezia alvaro." Si se refiere d los indfgenas, 
nos hace conocer sus trajes, armas, usos, costumbres, liti- 
les, enseres, dioses y ritos; su industria, que producla ob- 
jetos sorprendentes, en especial los hechos por los lapida- 
rios y orifices, ' 'que En nra Espafia los grandes plateros, 
tienen que mirar En ello;" su comercio inmensamente abas- 
tecido de muy diversas "mbrcaderias, " y jKir ultimo, el 
"gran congierto y rregimiento, que en todo tenian." 

Transcribe el autor las palabras memorables que pronun- 



LXIV 

ciaban Iob castellanos 6 los indfgenas, y no las amplfa ni 
las acorta, sino que les conserva efitrictamente bus propias 
ideas y su propia forma y con ellas su sentldo exacto; ofmos, 
por ejemplo, que Cort6s se expresa con elocuenciaartificio- 
; sa y Motecuhzoma con sencilla gravedad : no son, cierta- 
: mente, palabras que pronuncia una misma persona. Suce- 
de alguna vez que el autor no oy6, de quien las dijo, las 
palabras que tiene que repetir: advierte entonces que no 
son las '*formales.'' 

Diflcilmente serdn superadas las descripciones que Ber- 
'* nal hace de las guerras habidas entre los conquistadores y 
los naturales. For una parte presenta & aqu^Uos en perfec- 
j to orden, montados muchos d caballo, animal nunca visto 
en el Nuevo Mundo, y azuzando otros d lebreles feroces, 
igualraente desconocidos; sujetos todos los soldados & rigu- 
• rosa disciplina, conocedores de una tdctica avanzada, pro- 
vistos de armas de f uego, invulnerables bajo sus escudos y 
I armaduras de fieiTo, conscientes de su propia superiori- 
; dad, secundados por muchos millares de aliados indfgenas 
j y seguros en la victoria final. Por el lado opuesto aparecen 
los naturales no sometidos aiin, enteramente desnudos 6 
medio cubiertos con corazas de algod6n y cascos de piel 6 de 
pluma; hacinados en masas compactas; ignorantes del ver- 
dadero arte militar; teniendo por armas rodelas de carrizo, 
espadas de madera, piedras que lanzaban & mano 6 con 
hondas, y tiraderasquedespedlan varas tostadas; poco 6 na- 
da confiados en el triunf o, porque cref an que luchaban contra 
dioses ; sobreponi^ndose, no obstante, d su pesimismo. A van- 
zan luego los dos ej^rcitos, uno hacia otro, chocan y traban 
la pelea. Los indigenlis, unidos todavfa de una manera es- 
trecha, dan gritos y silbos agudos que Uenan el espacio, y 
y atacan todos de una vez, furiosamente, vertiginosaraen- 
te: sus piedras y varas forman una densa nube. Los caste- 
llanos resisten el formidable empuje sin recibir dano serio; 
d su turno disparan sus armas, y abren incontinent! enor- 



LXV 

mes brechas en la muchednmbre enemiga. Los naturales 
DO retroceden: la muerte les es familiar; levantan con pres- 
teza d los que ban cafdo, cierran de nuevo sus filas, y con- 
tindan el combate, resueltos, denodados y fren^ticos. 
Mas muere al fin sn jefe, dios terreno para ellos, y al pun- 
to Be desmoralizan, desunen y desbandan; huyen muy ve- 
lozmente, pero en seguida les da alcance la caballeria cas- 
tellana, que mala d muchos d lanzadas muy rdpidamente 
tambi6n: s61o se salvan los que corren con extrema ligereza, 
los que se inteman en las brenas y en los monies y los que 
86 echan d las lagunas 6 & los rfos. Si alguna vez, rara en 
verdad, las castellanos son quienes huyen, lo hacen paso & ; 

paso, no vueltas las espaldas, y combatiendo al retroceder 
para conservar d buena distancia A sus enemigos, que en su 
impotencia desesperada les dirigen denuestos y vituperios, 
"llamandonos bellacos y para poco, que no osabamos aten- 
delles todo el dia En batalla, sino bolbemos rretrayendo/' f 

A causa de que Bemal comprende miiltiples asuntos, se 
ve obligado en ocasiones d suspender la narraci6n princi- 
pal para emprender otra secundaria; empero, da antes una 
cumplida satisfacci6n & sus leyentes: "porq En vna sazon 
aconte^ian tres y quatro Cosas no puedo seguir la rrela- 
9ion y materia de lo que voy hablando, por dejar de dezir 
lo que mas viene al proposito, y a Esta cavsa no me culpen 
porq salgo y me aparto de la orden/* Si el relato inciden- 
tal no ofrece gran interns, lo abrevia el autor & fin de no 
pecar de difuso: "dexemos esto pues no haze a nra rrela§ion 
y no me lo tengan por prolixidad." 

Como Bemal no podfa presenciar los infinitos hechos & 
que did origen la Conqnista de la Nueva Espafia, verifica- 
doB muchos simultdneamente en lugares distintos, cuida de 
hablamos por separado de los sucesos que 61 vi6 y de los 
que s61o conoci6 de ofdas, para deslindar su propia respon- 
sabilidad y evitar cualquiera mala inteligencia; senala con 
la frase ^'diz que" lo que no le consta personalmente, 6 ad- 

Bemal Diaz del Castillo.— 9« 



LXVI 

vierte qtie por no haberlo presenciado 61, escribe "fueron, 
E esto hizieron, y tal les Acaescio, y no digo hiziraos, ni 
hize, ni vi, ni En ello me halle.'' Cuando habla de hechos 
que vi6, lo hace con maravillosa exactitud, porque guarda 
enteramente fresco su recuerdo, no obstante que contaban 
ya medio siglo de ocurridos: "agora que lo estoy escrivien- 
do se me rrepresenta todo delante de mis ojos, como si ayer 
f uera quando esto paso." Raz6n tenia el licenciado muy 
ret6rico guatemalteco para admirarse de que Bernal no hu- 
biera olvidado "cosa ninguna de todo lo que pasamos desq 
venimos a la nueba espaiia desde el ano de diez y siete hasta 
el de sesenta y ocho;" doblemente se habrfa asombrado si 
hubiese cafdo en la cuenta de que Bemal no pudo tomar 
apuntes durante la conquista, debidodque "En aquel tiem- 
po tenia otro pensam^ de Entender En lo que trayamos En 
manos, que es En lo militar y en lo que mi capitan me man- 
daba, y no En hazer rrelaQiones. " Nos queda por decir que 
para conocer los hechos que no habfa presenciado, consul- 
taba el autor documentos fehacientes, como las cartas escri- 
tas por Cortes y las cedulas reales, que lela atentamente 
**dos o tres vezes," 6 bien interrogaba & los testigos presen- 
ciales, suscompafierosde armas; citaremos un hechoen com- 
probaci6n: por haber estado Bemal "muy mal herido" en 
Tlaxcala el ano de 1519, no supo cabalmentequ6 hechos lle- 
varon al cabo entonces sus compatriotas; con el objeto dein- 
dagarlos, escribi6 desde Guatemala i, tres amigos suyos "que 
se hallaron en todas las mas conquistas, para que me enbien 
rrela§ion, porque no vaya ansi yncierto." Si alcanz6 d oir 
de personas fidedignas algun suceso, indica qui6nes fueron: 
"Esto lo oy dezir a los del rreal consejo de yndias Estando 
presente El obispo fray bartolome de las casas." Y en el 
caso de que ni directa ni indirectamente conozca determi- 
nado acontecimiento, lo dice con enterafranqueza; "esto no 
lo afirmo'' 6 " no se me Acuerda bien," 6 "los soldados que 
fueron [a] aquel biage lo sabran mejor rrelatar." 



Lzvn 

Para su 6poca, en la que era preciso falsear la Historia 
Biempre que el interns de la iglesia, del monarca 6 de la patria 
lo exigfan, Bernal fu6 extraordinariamente veridico, lo mis- 
mo cuando declaraba Bobre hechos presenciados per 61, que 
cuando hablaba de los que simplemente conocfa de ofdas. 
Desde el primer folio de su obra ofrece escribir "Bin torser a 
vna parte niaotra,'' porque "laverdad es cosa benditaysa- 
grada"ycuanto contra ellasedijere "vamaldito;'' ponedes- 
pu6fl el mayor empeno para cumplir su promesa, y ya al ter- 
minar, exclama con inocente uf aula, plenamente Batisfeclio, 
que la fama se huelga "En saber claram*® que todo lo que 
E escrito en mi rrela§ion es verdad y que la misma Escritu- 
ra trae consigo Al pie de la letra, lo que paso y no lisonxas 
y palabras viciosas.'' 

Dotado de criterio prdctico y positivo, desecha Bernal las 
causas Bobrenaturales6primerasy busca linicamente las efi- 
cientes 6 inmediatas que pueden explicar los hechos; de es- 
ta manera, no quiere atribuir las victorias de los castella- 
nos al poder divino, que precisamente porque lo demuestra 
todo, no explica nada en realidad, y busca la razon de ellas 
en la inteligencia de los capitanes, disciplina y valentfa de 
los soldados, superioridad de bus armas y ligereza de bus ca- 
ballos. For otra parte, las pasiones no Uegan A arrebatar d 
Bernal; el recuerdo de bus propias fatigas y heridas no le 
irrita, ni su perpetua m*iseria le exaspera: apenas si leve- 
mente se exalta al describir los templos indfgenas cuajados 
de sangre, en tanta cantidad, "que los doy d la maldi§ion.'* 

El entiisiasmo que sentimos por Bernal, no nos hace juz- 
garle inf alible ni impecable; iqui^n no hierra y qui6n no 
peca? 

El autor mismo reconoce su incapacidad para consignar 
las fechas: "esto de los afios no se me acuerda bien/' Con 
ef ecto, senalaremos, entre otros errores en que incurre, que 
dice querindi6 su informaci6n de m6ritos y servicios, el ano 
de 1540, en la ciadad de Mexico, precisamente cuando 61 se 



/I 

/ 



Lxvm 
encontraba en Espafia; que Cort6s volvi6 de las Hibueras 
hacia 1524 6 1525, esto es, uiio6dos aflos antes de la verda- 
derafecha desuregreso, etc. Podemos establecer de unama- 
nera general que el autor manifiesta el mayor descuido para 
toda clase de cif ras ; f recuentemente deja sin llenar el espacio 
donde debfan de Ir, 6 las escribe de un modo bastante ra- 
re: 18U1 por 186, iVSXLpor 1540, IVVI por 1551; repite 
el mismo niimero en los intitulados de varios capftulos, 6 
pone, verbigracia, XXV, CXLVHI y CXXI en lugar de 
XXIV, CL y CLXI. 

Apuntaremos ahora los pecados de Bemal. Oon la mira, 
seguramente, de desvanecer la inculpaci6n de crueldad que 
desde entonces se lanz6 d los conquistadores, suele callar 6 
atenuar algunos de sus mds inicuos atentados, como la ma- 
tanza de Cholula, y f alsear otros radicalmente, aun d rries- 
go de incurrir en contradiccidn flagrante: & ralz de haber 
afirmado, por ejemplo, que los mismos mexica mataron & 
Motecuhzoma, d pesar de que '*bien le conos§ieron, " les 
presenta haciendo "muy gran llanto" y diciendo d los cas- 
tellanos: '* Agora pagareys, muy de verdad la muerte de 
nro rrey y senor." No satisfecho todavia con esto Bemal, 
procura enaltecer de tiempo en tiempo d sus compatriotas 
mds de lo debido, y deprirair en cambio d los indfgenas, 
por via de contraste, 6 tal vez para debilitar un tanto el 
interns que pudieran despertar en los lectores; reduce, 
asl, d un mfnimo irrisorio, el niimero de los aliados in- 
dfgenas que auxiliaron d los castellanos en todas las gue- 
rras de conquista, y pinta con colores exageradamente 
negros d las diversas razas que poblaban la Nueva £spafia. 
Felizmente son excepcionales en el autor los pecados que 
acabamos de apuntar. Bernal obedece, por lo comiin, d un 
doble esplritu de verdad y de justicia; no encubre que los 
castellanos vinieron acd incitados por la ambici6n del oro, 
ni el cardcter vanddlico de sus correrlas, ni el trato inhu- 
mano que daban d los indios ya sometidos; no oculta la 



avanzada cultura de la Gran Tenochtitlan, que en tal cnal 
pnnto jnzga Boperior d la de Espafla, ni el patriotismo he- 
Toico 7 resistencia sin igual de los mexica; tampoco tiene 
empacho para censurar & Cortes ni para admirar al mismo 
tiempo d Cuauhtemoc. 
Bemal, paes, se adelant6 mucho & su ^poca. 



§ IV -BIBLIOGRAFIA. ' 

1. Historia Verdadera de la Conquisia de la Ntieva-Espafla escrita 
par el Capiian Bemal Diaz del Castillo^ vno de sua Conquistador es. 
Sacada d Ivz For el P. M. Fr. Alonso Remon, Predicador, y Coro- 
nista General del Orden de Nuestra Sefiora de la Merced Redemp- 
don de Cautivos, A la Catholica Magestad del Mayor Monarca 
Don Felipe Qvarto, Rey de las Espafias, y Nuevo Mundo, N. Seflor. 
Conprivilegio. En Madrid en la Imprenta del Reyno, Aflo de 1632. — 
1 vol, en 4^' de 6 folios preliminares, inclusive la portada^ 254 de tex- 
to y 6 de tabla. 

Sin fijar fecha, dice Nicolas Antonio que fray AlonBo 
Rem6n, i. quien llama Alphonsus Ramon, naci6|en Vara de 
Rey; anade que graduado de doctor, visti6 el hdbito de la 
Orden de la Merced y que se distingui6 por su erudicidn 
acabada y fAcil ingenio. * Murid probablemente despu6s 
del 18 de junio de 1681, fecha del privilegio real que se 
le concedid para la impresi6n de la Historia Verdadera^ y 
antes de que ^ta saliese d luz, porque en la advertencia 
al lector, que trae, se dice que era ya fallecido *'el venera- 



1 El primer ensayo formal de mia bibliograffa de la Historia Ver- 
dadera^ se debe 6 nnestro bnen amigo, el Inteligenie y emdito histo- 
ri6grafo don Lnifl Q-onzAlez Obreg6n, quien lleg6 & registrar trece 
tftulos diversos. V^ase el cap. Ill de sn obra ya citada. 

2 Biblioteca Hispana Nova sive Hispanomm Scriptorum qui ab anno 
MD. ad MDOCLXXXIV. floniare notitia. Matriti. 1783-88. Tfomo T, 
p6g.42. 



LXX 

ble P. M." Fray Jos6 Antonio Garl y Siumell publica 
un catdlogo de las obras de Rem6n, que comprende 42 
tltulos, los mds de carActer religioso. ^ Otro catdlogo muy 
anterior, encierra s61o 84, pero sin contar *'cinco iibros 
qdexo en la Imprenta'' y fuera '*de otras quarenta obri- 
llas menores."^ Fruto de tan portentosa actividad fu6 la 
impresidn de la Historia Verdadera, que tenia muy adelan- 
tada cuando muri6, y A la cual di6 fin **el Illmo. D. Fr. 
Gabriel Adarzo de Santander, Obispo de Otranto en la 
Calabria."^ 

Asienta fray Francisco de Benavides, religioso merceda- 
rio, que su hermano en Jesucristo fray Alonso cumpli6 re- 
ligiosamente con las leyes de la Historia, que son, advierte, 
'*no metir, componiendo lo falso, ni lisongear callado lo 
verdadero, sino referir en todo y por todo la verdad. " ^ De 
seguro que fray Francisco no vi6 nunca por sus propios 
ojos el aut6grafo de la Historia Verdadera^ porque habria 
sabido entonces que fray Alonso, lejos de respetar de una 
manera cuidadosa esas leyes, las infringi6 totalmente, sin 
el menor escriipulo, de una manera absoluta. 

Como para demostrar semejante infraccion, no es sufi- 
ciente laTabla de Variantes que inclulmos en el Ap6ndice, 
debido d que s61o abraza los 14 primeros folios del aut6gra- 



1 Biblioteca Mercedaria. Barcelona. 1875. P^. 245-7. 

2 Este tiltimo cat&Iogo estA insertado en los folios preliminares 3" 
y 4- de la primera edici6n de la Historia Verdadera. 

3 Job6 Mariano Beristtin de Sonza. Biblioteca Hispano-America- 
na Septentrional. M6xico. 1816-21. Tomo I, p6g. 432. 

4 En Fray Alonso Rem6n. Historia General de la Orden de Nra S.* 
de la Merced Bedempcion de Cautiuos. Madrid. 1633. Folio prelimi- 
nar 2? — El antor dej6 asimismo sin concluir esta obra, la cual pas6, 6, 
su muerte, por otros ojos y por otras manos, seglin declara en el proe- 
mio el propio fray Francisco de Benavides, omitiendo decir desgracia- 
damente cu&les fueron esos ojos y esas manos. 



LXKI 

fo y los correBpondientes de la ediei6ii hecha por Rem6n/ 
vamofl & indicar aqui alganas de las adulteraciones princi- 
pales que contienen los folios posteriores. 

Principiaremos con las f alsedades relativas A fray Barto- 
lom6 de Olmedo y demds religiosos mercedarios que figuraa 
en dicha edicion. 

Segiin el aut6grafo, Olmedo fu6 uno de tantos frailes ve- 
nidos d America durante la conqiiista, que poco 6 nada hi- 
cieron en pro de la fe cristiana. Bemal habla de 61 con 
eierta indif erencia, excepto cuando refiere la astucia consu- 
mada que tuvo para enganar & Pdnfilo de Narvdez, protes- 
tdndole sincera amistad y adhesion incondicional; le llama 
A, secas el f raile de la Merced y Uega hasta acusarle de que 
no desplegd celo religioso, porque d pesar de que dispuso 
de tiempo sobrado, no atrajo & Motecuhzoma d "que se 
bolbiese xpiano;" en el capftulo donde prodiga entusidsti- 
COB elogios 6, todos los castellanos que acompafiaron, desde 
Cuba, & Hern An Cortes, se limita d escribir de Olmedo: 
**paso vn frayle de nra senora de las mds. que se dezia fray 
br"* de olmedo y Era teologo y gran cantor murio de su 
mnerte/' Cort6s casi no le menciona;aun su nombre omite 
al referirse A 61 en su segunda carta de relaci6n, donde le 
llama sencillamente "un religioso que yo truje en mi com- 
pania, '' ^ No es aventurado asegurar que murid Olmedo muy 
poco despu^s de ganada la Ciudad de Mexico; el mismo Re- 
m6n manifiesta en la Historia General de su Orden (que 
dej6 sin enmendar) que terminado el sitio, Cort6s pregun- 
t6 A Olmedo donde querfa fundar el convenio de la orden 
de la Merced; respondi61e Olmedo que para escoger el lu- 
gar, necesitaba consultar con el general de su orden; escri- 



1 Una tabla completa habrla llenado varios voltLmenes sin otro ob- 
jeto que dar 6 conocer IntLtiles mentiras. 

2 Obra citada, p^. 116. 



Lxxn 
bi6 efectivamente & 6ste, pero antes de que recibiera con- 
testaci6n, Bufri6 *'vn accidete repentino, y en pocos diafl 
muri6, sin poderse dar tierapo & tener respuesta de Espa- 
fSa de lo que auia escrito. '' ^ Nos induce d creer esto, la cir- 
cunstancia de que, verificado el reparto del oro que se hubo 
en la Gran Tenochtitlan, luego que Oort6s qued6 dueno de 
ella, Bemal no vuelve d decir una sola palabraacerca de Ol- 
medo. Las primeras relaeiones y crdnicas impresas tampo- 
co hablaban favorablemente de 6ste; al contrario, una de 
ellas afirmaba que si bien era cierto que Olmedo habia ca- 
tequizado d la Malintzin y el P. Juan Diaz la habia bauti- 
zado, no seentendiaque ambos hubieran hecho ''raas q este 
primero lance. ' ' '^ Consiguientemente, Olmedo no daba nom- 
bre algunod suorden : antes la desprestigiaba en grado sumo. 
Rem6n quiso remediar tan sensible mal, y aprovecIi6 la 
coyuntura que le ofrecia el hallazgo de la Hiatoria Verda- 
dera para convertir d Olmedo en un conquistador espiritual 
de inspiraci6n divina y muy acendrada caridad cristiana. 
La conversi6n era fdcil: se lograba haciendo decir d Bernal, 
testigo presencial irrecusable, cuantas falsedades fuesen 
necesarias, que no desmentirla seguramente, porque conta- 
ba ya de muerto medio siglo. Sin que le retrajera el temor 
de pecar, Rem6n llev6 al cabo su prop6sito con inmutable 
perseverancia, adulterando d cada paso el texto de Bemal. 
De esta suerte nos explicamos por qu6 en la edicidn que Be- 
m6n prepar6, Olmedo resucita y aconseja luminosamente d 
Gort6s; pacifica de manera elocuente y roansad los natura* 
les de Pdnuco y les doctrina muy santamente; concierta un 
matrimonio entre un hijo de Francisco de Garay y una hi- 
ja de Cort6s; acompana d Pedro de Alvarado d la conquista 
de Guatemala, confoi*ta d sus soldados para que no desfa- 



1 Fol. 122 fte. 

2 Fray Joan de Grijalva. Cronica de la Orden de N. P. S. Agustin 
en las provincias de la Nnena Espaiia. Mexico. 1624, Fol. 1 vto. 



ucxm 
Uezcan durante las batallas y catequiza al cacique Utlatan 
antes de que lo quemen; difnnde la fe cristiana entre los 
zapoteca con asombrosa diligencia, no obstante "que es- 
taua cansado, y viejo, y que no podia yaandar caminos;''^ 
gobierna como vicario los principales hospitales estableci- 
doB en Mexico y fundauno especial para los indios, y niuere, 
en fin, hasta 1525, en olor de santidad. Agradecidas hon- 
damente todas las clases sociales de Mexico, agrega Rem6n, 
le lloran en masa y sin consuelo, y le entierran "con gran 
pompa en sefior Santiago;"^ en el duelo general, sobresa- 
len naturalmente los indios que permanecen "todo el tiem- 
po, desque murio, hasta que le enterraron, sin comer bo- 
cado-''^ 

Si A mds de Olmedofiguraban de un modo ejemplar otros 
mercedarios en la conquista de la Nueva Espafia y Centro 
America, la orden de la Merced centuplicarla su gloria y 
se elevarla inmensurablemente sobre las otras 6rdenes, que 
eran siis emulas. Este pensamiento tentador estirould d Re- 
mon & hacer decir & Bemal, entre otros nuevos embustes no 
menos estupendos que losanteriores, que el Lie. Alonso de 
Zuazo trajo consigo & dos f railes mercedarios, ' 'se dezia, el 
vno Fray Gon5alo de Pontevedra, y el otro Pray luan Varillas 
natural de Salamanca;'^ * que 6ste ultimo acompafl6 al capi- 
t4n Luis Marfn 6, Chiapas, y que alU, d ejemplo de Olmedo, 
esforzaba d los castellanos, catequizaba & los naturalesy les 
rompfa sus fdolos, resultando herido alguna vez; quemds 
tarde, el mismo Varillas sale con Cortes para las Hibueras, 
y que fu6 entonces cuando catequiz6 6 sirapleraente confesd 
(Rem6n es obscuro en este punto) & Cuauhtemoc y & Tetepan- 
qu6tzalt, mementos antes de que les colgaran; porque fray 



1 Fol. 190 fte. 

2 Pol. 211 fte. 

3 All! mismo. 

4 Pol. 173 fte. 

Bemal Dlax del Castillo.— 10* 



LXXIV 

Juan Babla **algo, de lalengua," ^ mejordichonosabia algo 
sino mucho, y aun era un poll glota : predicaba en Trujillo sin 
int6rprete,'aventajAndose inmenBamente d los f railee francis- 
cos, que b61o podfan predicar con 6ste. ^ 

Por liltimo, envla acd Rem6n en compafifa del propio 
Cortes, cuando regresa 6ste de Espafia, & "doze Frayles de 
la Merced, para que lleuasen adelante lo que auia dexado 
empe§ado Fray Bartolome, ya por mi memorado: y los que 
despues del f ueron, y estoB de aora, no eran menos virtuo- 
sos, e buenoB que los otros, que se los dio por tales a Cor- 
tes el General de la Merced por mandado del Consejo de 
las Indias, e venia por cabesa dellos vn Fray luan de Le- 
guizamo, Vizcaino, buen Letrado, y santo." * Aparece hoy 
bien comprobado que por aquellos tiempos s61o vinieron & 
la Nueva Espafia dos frailes mercedarios: Olraedo y otro cu- 
yo nombre ignoramos, & quien llama Manos-albas el Obis- 
po don fray Juan de Zumdrraga, y del cual escribe que vi- 
no afios antes que 61, era *'fraile profeso de la Merced," de 
vida muy relajada, disoluto, piiblico jugador, ap6stata, 
descomulgado, "confesaba, absolvia de todo y era el pro- 
tector de lofl pecadores piiblicos."* 

No obstante, contadisimas personaspudieron entonces des- 
cubrir que Remdn habfa adulterado la Hiatoria Verdadera^ 
y por esto casi todos los autores, seglares 6 eclesidsticos, que 
trataron posteriormente de la conquista dela Nueva Espafia, 
estamparon en bus obras con aureolas de gloria las f alsas fi- 
gurasdelreprochableOlmedo y quim^ricos secuaces; libros 



1 Fol. 200 vto. 

2 Aunque poco expUcito el texto, Rem6n lo aclara con una apos- 
tilla. V^ase el fol. 207 vto. 

3 Fol. 231 vto. 

4 Respuesta que di6 dicho Obispo & una acusaci6n presentada en 
su contra por el Lie. Delgadillo. En Joaquin Garcia Icazbalceta. Don 
Fray Juan de Zum&rraga, Primer Obispo y Arzobispo de Mexico. 
1881. Ap6ndice, p6g. 65. 



LXXV 

hay donde Be ve & Olmedo semejante & nna aparici6ii divi- 
na, & trav6s de celeste claridad, '^como niebla, peroblan- 
cayapacible/'^ 

No satisfecho Remdn con las adulteraciones sellaladas, 
introdu jo otras numerosas para f avorecer, ya & los conquis- 
tadores en general, ya solamente & los que mayores simpa- 
tfas le inspiraban, porejemplo, d Cort6s y Alvarado, y pro- 
cnr6 repetidas veces corregir el estilo del autor, si bien, 
lejos de lograrlo, quit6 en todas ellas al texto original su 
graciosa naturalidad y clara precisidn. 

Debemos advertir primeramente que no son voluntarias 
todas las modificaciones de simple forma que presenta la 
edicion de Rem6n. Muchas se deben & una mala lectura del 
ant6grafo, 6 d un imperdonable descuido del copista 5 im- 
presor; porejemplo: 



Dice el autor: 
Xayme tria y geronimo tria. 
conas, E vigas. 
preeentado a bus ydolos. 
todos los 9oques hasta chiapas E cina- 
cantan. 

oomo se disesen los rromanos o sus 
aliados. 
ya no via de viejo. 



Dice Ilem6n: 
Jaime Tria o Geronimo Tria. 
cunas viejas. 
presentado a sus Indios. 
todos los zoqueschas, Tacheapa e Ci- 
nacantan. 

como si dixessen los Romanos halla- 
dos. , 

ya no aula del viejo. 



Probablemente reconocen iguales causas que las anterio- 
res modificaciones, las corrupciones de ciertos nombres cas- 
tellanos 6 indf genas, como ^stas: Artiaga, Azeuedo 6 Salce- 
do, Balmor, Bonal, Camargo, Celiano, Galvez, Rico; por 
Archilaga, Sauzedo, Baena, Con-al, Carmona, ^isil^^^o? 
Alavez y Ruiz; Vaimo por Bayamo; cactle por gacotle; Co- 
coivacinporCuacayutzin; Aguayalco, Aculaco, Colvatitlan, 



1 Fray Marcos Salmeron. Recverdos historicos y politicos de loB 
servicioB qve los Generales y varones ilvstres de la Religion de Nves- 
tra Sefiora de la Merced, Redencion de Cautiuos ban hecho a los Re- 
yes de Espaiia en los dos Mundos. Valencia. 1646. P&g. 283. Alios 
antes habla hablado de la misma prodigiosa yi8i6n Bartolom6 Leonar- 
do de Argensola en sus Anales de Arag6n, impresos hacia 1630. 



LXXVI 



Iiianazagapa, Izguatepeqne, Nachapla; por Ayagualulco, 
Agula, Gualtitan, Juanagagapa, Ciguatecad, Nachapalan. 
Exceptuadas esas modificaciones, todae las demds son 
manifiestamente intencionales, segdn se puede ver desde 
luego por las sigaientes de estilo: 



Dice el autor: 
devieron de dar oro A gomara e otras 
dadivas porq lo escriviese. 
Como habian escapade de la de ma^a- 
gatos, como dice el rrefran, tuvieron 
gran temor. 
lea dio mal de lomos. 
preguntar por ellas [las indias que 
huian huido] Era como quien dize 
buscar A mahoma En granada o Es- 
crevir a mi hijo El bachiller En sala- 
mancu. 

dixeron quel obispo de burgos q ya abia 
perdido y q no estava su magestad 
bien con el. 



Dice Rem6n: 
deuieron de granjear al Gomara con 
dadiuas. 

como avian escapado tan mal parados 
de lo de Mexico tuvieron gran temor. 

les di6 mal en los riiiones. 
pregutar por ellas era por demas. 



dixeron, que el Obispo de Burgos ya 
no tenia mano en el gouiemo." 



No es raro que Rem6n invierta por completo el sentido 
de las proposiciones; escribe, verbigracla: temian que Cor- 
tes les nombrasse Cacique, en lugar de tenian nes^esidad, 
que cortes les nombrase ca§ique; vuelve afiriuativa una 
oraci6n negativa: los que teniamos caballos, por los que no 
teniamos; 6 vice versa: Cort6s entr6 en el rfo de Alvarado 
como dize Gomara, por cortes no Entro En el rrio de alba- 
rado como lo dize gomara. 

Las variaciones de niimeros introducidas por Rem6n vi- 
cian desde el primero hasta el liltimo capftulo: donde Ber- 
nal dice, por ejemplo, veinte mil pesos, mil canoas, diez 
dlas, tresafios, mil indios, trescientos soldados, tres heri- 
dos, ochenta muertos: Rem6n suele poner treinta mil pesos, 
cuatro mil canoas, doce dlas, ciertos anos, dos mil indios, 
tres soldados, ^ cinco heridos, ciento cincuenta muertos. 

Para mutilar el texto original, no se muestra mds medido 
Rem6n, pues suprime folios enteros, como el 1 que contie- 



1 En el fol. 25 vto., reduce Bem6n trescientos soldados A los tres 
susodichofiu 



Lxxvn 
ne noticias antobiogrdficas, y el 262 y siguiente destinadoB 
i una bellfsima descripci6n de las suntuosas fiestas verifi- 
cadas aqul el afio de 1538; tambi^n hace desaparecer ca- 
pftulos Integros, como el CCXIIIyelCCXIV;otra8 mutila* 
clones, aunqae parciales, son igualmente sensibles, porque 
ocultan hechos tan fnteresantes como 6stob: que Cortes tu- 
70 envidia de Alvarado en cierta ocasion; que varios sol- 
dados le acusaron de que habfa matado d su esposa dofia 
Gatalina, y que el mismo Cortes di6 buenos pueblos de en- 
comienda **a vn Avalos y sayavedra sus debdos y a vn ba- 
rrios con quien caso su cufiada hermana de su muger la 
marcayda porq no le aCusasen la muerle de su [muger] ;'* 
que anos despu^s de la conquista, si los castellanos tenfan 
que repartir alguna cosa de gran valor, decfan & manera 
de refrdn: "no se lo rrepartir como cortes q se tomd todo 
el oro [y] lo mas y mejor de la nueva espafia para si;" que 
hubo co^quistadores que juzgaron quedeshonraba d Espa- 
fia la matanza que Pedro de Alvarado hizo en el gran tem- 
plo; que los sacerdotes espafioles que doctrinaban & los 
indios, soiian tomarles sus haciendas, y otros detalles muy 
iraportantes relativos d la Noche Triste, d la armada de Pe- 
dro de Alvarado, & la conducta de Miguel Diaz de Auz an- 
te los oidores, etc., etc. Quizd por antipatia calla Rem6n, 
en determinadas circunstancias, los nombres de algunos 
castellanos, como los de Alonso de Avila, Gonzalo Mejia, 
Pedro Gallego, Francisco de Medina, Alonso Bellido, y aun 
de alguna castellana, como Maria de Estrada, linica mujer 
de Castilla que acompafi6 & los conquistadores la primera 
vez que vinieron d Mexico. 

Con el objeto de no dejar rota la ilaci6n del texto, acos- 
tumbra Rem6n intercalar una 6 mds palabras suyas cuan- 
do suprirae otras del aut6grafo. Empero, no espera seme- 
jante oportunidad para afiadir en cualquier lugar cuanto 
le viene d las mientes. 



Lxxvm 

2. Historia Verdadera de la Conqvista de la Ntieva Espafla, Escrita 
por el Capitan Bemal Diaz del Castillo, vno de sus Conquistadores' 
Sacada a luz^ Por el P. M, Fr, Alonso Remon, Predicador y Coro- 
nista Oeneral del Orden de N. 8. dela Merced Redendon de Cau- 
tiuos. A la Catholica Magestad del Mayor Monarca D. Filipe IV. 
Rey de las Espaflaa y Nuevo Mundo N. 8. Con Priuilegio^ En Ma^ 
drid en la Emprenta del Reyno. 1 vol, en i'' de 5 folios preliminarea, 
256 de texto y 6 para la tabla. 

Este tltulo estA impreso sobre una portada grabada por 
Juan de Oourbes, cuyas figuras principales representan, la 
de la derecha A Hernd,n Cortes, y la del lado opuesto A fray 
Bartolom6 de Olmedo. Lob fols. 255 y 256 comprenden an 
nuevo capftulo con el siguiente intitulado: *'Esle capitvlo, 
qve es el vltimo del original, por parecer escusado, se dexo 
de imprimir; y oy a peticion de vn Curioso se afiade." Por 
no tener el original este capitulo y no ajustarse, ademds, ni 
en su fondo ni en su forma al estilo del autor, no vacila- 
moB en tacharlo de ap6crifo. 

Como la edici6n carece de fecha, se ha discutido macho 
para fijarla. Vedfa duda si esta edici6n y la anterior son 
dos 6 una raisma con diferente portada/ y Jourdanet^ y Ba- 
tres Jduregui^ tampoco aciertan & dilucidar el punto: supo- 
nemos que ninguno de los tres examin6 cuidadosamenteam- 
bas ediciones, cuyos folios preliminares, lo mismo que los 
del texto y de la tabla ofrecen notabillsiraas diferencias en 
los niimeros de la foliaci6n, letra, tamafio de las columnas, 
adornos puestos al principio y al fin de algunos capftulos, 
asteriscos marginales de los folios 89, 92, 93, 95, etc, de la 
primera edici6n, convertidos en manecillas en la segunda, 
y manecillas de los folios 16, 24, 86, 45, etc., de ^sta, que 
f altan en aqu^lla. El inteligente librero londinense Bernard 



1 En las Noticias Biogr&ficas que encabezan su propia edici6n. 

2 En el Prefacio de su traducci6n. 

3 En Guatemala Literaria, ntLmero citado. 



LXXIK 

Qnaritch admite que son dos distintas edicioneB, pero opi- 
na que la ciie8ti6n de prioridad no ha podido resolverse has- 
ta ahora,^ lo que es absurdo, porque se deduce claramente 
del intitulado del nuevo capftulo que trae afiadido la edi- 
ci6n de que tratamos, que en la otra se habfa omltido el 
propio capftulo, y que por tanto, esta otra es la primera. 
El eminente bibli6grafo Henry Harrisse acepta igualraente 
que son dos ediciones diversas, si bien manifiesta que f ue- 
ron hechas el mismo afio,* asercl6n inadniisible, porque la 
Buroa de tasa de la edici6n que hemos descrito bajo el nil- 
mero 1, estd fechada A 4 de noviembre de 1632, y como al- 
gunos dfas debieron de transcurrir todavfa para el arreglo 
final de la obra, ^ta no pudo, pues, salir & luz, sino cuando 
fenecia ya dicho afio; en consecuencla, la nueva edici6n, por 
muy violentaraente que f uera impresa, tampoco pudo estar 
conclufda, sino hasta el siguiente afio. Garcia Icazbalceta 
supone, de una manera ernSnea, que la segunda edicidn tie- 
ne la fecha de la primera; & pesar de esto, escribe: *'los bi- 
bIi6grafos creen que f u6 hecha hacia 1700. Yo la considero 
algo anterior. ''* Pero es inconcuso que la repetida segunda 
edicidn Bali6 & luz muy poco despn^s que la primera, hacia 
1633 6 1634, tanto porque los caracteres de su impresi6n 
corresponden & la 6poca, cuanto porque no se conocen gra- 
bados hechos posteriormente por Juan de Courbes.* 



1 Bibliotheca Hispana. A catalogue of books in castilian, Catalan, 
Portuguese Or otherwise of Spanish interest. Nt&m. 148. London, 1896. 
P6g. 1S». 

2 Bibliotheca Americana Velmstissima. New York y Paris, 1866-72. 
Primera Parte, p6g. 170. 

3 En Diccionario Universal de Historia y Geografia citado, tomo 
m, pAg. 61. 

4 V6ase Agustln Ce&n Bermtidez. Diccionario Hist6rioo de los mia 
ilnstres profesores de Bellas Artes de Espafia. Madrid. 1800. Tomo I, 
p^. 367-8. Constiltese tambi^n el Diccionario Enciclop^ico Hispa- 
Do-Americano de Literatnra, Ciencias y Artes. Barcelona. 1887-99. 
Tomo V. Segunda Parte, p^. 1241. 



LXXX 

3. Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de la Nueva Espafia. Es- 
crita por el Capitan Bemal Diaz del Castillo^ uno de sua Conquis- 
tador es. En Madrid, En la Imprenta de Don Benito Cano, Afio 
1795. 4 vols, en 16: 

Edicidn hecha con esmero. 

4. The True History of the Conquest of Mexico^ written in the year 
1568. Translated fron the original Spanish by Maurice Keatinge. 
London. 1800. 1 vol en 8.** v 

5. La misma traducci&n, reimpresa en Salem, el afio de 1803, 2 
vols, en 12." 

Brunet* escribe que esta edicion fu6 hecha hacia 1823, 
pero Rich,^ que debe de haberia conocido mejor, y Bancroft ^ 
aseguran que es de 1803. NosotroB no hemos logrado verla. 

6. Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de la Nueva Espafia es- 
crita por Bemal Diaz del Castillo, uno de sus conquistador cs. Nue- 
va edicidn corregida. Paris. Libreria de Rosa. 1837. 4 vols, en 16." 

7. DenkwUrdigkeiten des Hauptmanns Bemal Diaz del Castillo, 
oderwarhhafte Oeschichte der Entdedkung und Eroberungvon Neu- 
Spanien, von einem der Entdecker und Eroberer selbst geschrieben, 
aus dem Spanischen ins Deutsche ilbersetzt, und mit dem Leben des 
Vesfassers, mit Anmerkungen und andem Zugaben versehen von Ph. 
J. von Rehfues. Bonn bei Adolph Marcus. 1838. 4 vols, en 12.'' 

Debemos la noticia de esta edici6n A nuestro respetable 
amigo el distinguido profesor americanista Sr. Dr. Eduar- 
do Seler. 



1 Manuel du libraire et de I'amateur de livres. Paris. 1860-66. To- 
me II, Primera Parte, colnmna 679. 

2 Bibliotheca Americana Nova: or A Catalogue of books in varions 
languages, relating to America, printed since the year 1700. London, 
New York. 1885-44. Tomo II, pAg. 418. 

8 Obra citada, tomo IX, p&g. XLVII. 



IJtXXI 



L 



8. La misma traducciiki, reimpresa tambi^ en Bonn durante los 
afios de 1843-44. 4 vols, en 12." 



9. The Memoirs of the Conquistador Berrud Diaz del Castillo writ- 
ten by himself containing a true and full account of the Discovery 
and Conquest of Mexico and New Spain. Translated from the origi- 
nal Spanish by John Ingram Lockarty F. R. A. 8. Author of ^^ Atti- 
ca and Athens.^'' In two volumes. ^London. J. Haichard and Son. 
137. Piccardilly. MDCCCXLIV. 2 vols, en 8.* 

10. Die Entdeckung und Erobemng von Mexiko. Mit Vorwort von 
Karl Bitter, Hamburg. 1849. 2 vols, en 8.' 

Traduccion incompleta y mutilada. 

11. Biblioteca de Autores EspafloleSy desde la formacion del len- 
guaje hasta nuestros dias. Historiadores Primitivos de Indias. Co- 
leccion dirigida 6 ilustrada por don Enrique de Vedia. Madrid. 
Imprenta y Estereotipia de M. Bivadeneyra, Salon del Prado, 8. 
1852-53. 2 vols, en 4.' {XXII y XXVI de la Colecci&n). 

La Historia Verdadera ocupa las pdgs. 1 d 817 del vol. II. 

12. Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de la Niieva Espafla es- 
crita por el Capitan Bemal Diaz del Castillo, una de sus Conquista- 
tadores. Tipografia de B. Bafael, Calle de Cadena nUm. 13. 1854. 4 
vols, en 8.** 

13. Verdadera Historia de los Su^cesos de la conquista de la Nue- 
va Espafia por Bemal Diaz del Castillo. Madrid. Tejado. 1862. 3 
vols, en 8."" 

Cuando escriblamos estas Noticias bio-bibliogrAficas, no 
conocfamoB aAn la anterior edici6n, que acabamos de ver 
anunciadaen el Boletln Bibliogr^fico, correspondiente A ju- 
nio y Julio liltimos, que publica en Madrid la Sra. Viuda 
de Rico y que bondadosamente nos en via. 

- Bernia Diaz del CastUlo,— U* 



Lxxxn 

14. Historia Verdudera de la Conquista de la Nueva Espafla es- 
crita por el Capitan Bemal Diaz del Castillo^ uno de sus conquista^ 
dores. Mexico. Imprenta de I, Escalante y Comp. Bajos de San 
Agustin nUm, 1. 1870. 3 vols, en 5.* {IV, V y VI de la Biblioteca 
Hisidrica de la Iberia). 

15. Histoire VSridique de la ConquHe de la Nouvelle Espagne 
Scrite par le Capitaine Bemal Diaz del Castillo. Vun de ses con- 
quistadores. Traduction par D. Jourdanet. Paris. Lahure. 1876, 2 
vols, en 8/ 

Edici6ii privada de 250 ejemplares. 

16. La misma traducci&n, publicada un afio despu6s, tambiin en 
Paris, por G. Masson. 1 vol. en 4." 

17. VSridique Histoire de la Conqutte de la Nouvelle Espagne 
par le Capitaine Bemal Diaz del Castillo. Vun des Conqu^rants. 
Traduite de Vespagnol avec une introduction et des notes par JosS 
Maria deHeredia. Paris. Alphonse Lemerre. 1877'-87. 4 vols, en 12.'' 

Preciosa edici6n impresa por A. Qaantin para el editor. 

18. Reimpresi&n del nilm. 11, hecha en Madrid el afio de 1877. 

19. Ifjusagi iratok tdra. Az orsz. kozepisk. tandregyesulet kiad- 
vdnya. Kilidn Fr. biz. Franklin tdrsulat nyomdsa. Castillo i Diaz 
Bemal. Mexico f elf edezese es meghoditdsa. Atdolgozta dr. Brozik 
Karoly. 1 terHppel. 1878. 1 vol. en 12.'' {IV de la ColecciM). 

DebemoB la noticia de esta edici6n y la del niim. 21 A 
nuestro antiguo amlgo el sefior Cdnsul General de Mexico 
en Budapest, D. Eugenio de Bdn6. 

20. Historia Verdadera de la Conquista de la Nueva Espafla es- 
crita por el Capitan Bemal Diaz del Castillo, uno de sus conquista- 
dores. Mixico. Tipografia de Angel Bassols y Hermanos. Segunda 
calle de Mesones nilm. 22. 1891-92. 3 vols, en 8.* 



Lxxxin 



21. Tort&nelmi Konyvtdr. Franklin. Ulrsulat. Cortez HemandOy 
Mexico meghdditqja. Diaz Bemal utdn elmesMi Oaal Mozes. Buda- 
pest, 1899. 1 vol. en 12.' {NUm. 86 dela Coleccidn). 



* 
* * 



R^stanos manifestar nnestra gratitud d nuestro inme- 
jorable amigo, el erudito, sabio y virtuoso sefior Oan6ni- 
go D. Vicente de P. Andrade, que espontdneaiaente quiso 
encargarse de formar el Indice Alfab^tico de nombres pro- 
pios 7 cosas notables de la Historia Verdadera, con el cual 
cerramos la presente edici6n. 




NUMERO 1. 

|EMOS formado el siguiente Cuadro Geneal6gico en 
vista de uno que tuvo la bondad de remitimos el 
Sr. Lie. D. Antonio Batres JAnregui, y que desgraciada- 
mente no comprende A todos los descendientea de Bemal en 
Guatemala; faltan, por ejemplo, los hijos de Francisco Diaz 
Becerra y desu segunda mujer, Isabel de Cdrcamo, que fue- 
ron varios: D. Jos^ Maria de Heredia publica las actas de 
bautismo de Tom^, Bemab6 y Maria, nacidos respectiva- 
mente en 1586, 1588 y 1602 (obra citada, tomo IV, pdginas 
407-8), y el Obispo D. Francisco de Paula Garcia PelAez 
menciona & Jacinto, primer provincial criollo de la Orden 
de Santo Domingo en Guatemala, y Ambrosio, dedn de la 
iglesia catedral de aquella ciudad (obra citada, tomo 11, pd- 
gina 6); D. Jos6 Milla dice que fray Jacinto fu6 *'sujeto re- 
comendable por bus virtudes y letras'' (obra citada, tomo 
n, pdg. 318). 



LXXXVI 




■I 



i 

►5 



;3 



■I 



s 






■8 





Sag 











§ 




!§li- 



I 

•8|' 

el, 



"s 



a 
4 



Lxxxvn 



-I 



■ o 



^1 










■^ 





ISr TJ M E R O 3 . 



TABLA DB VARIANTES. 

COMPRENDE SOLO LOS MAS NOTABLES DE LOS 14 PRIHEROS FOLIOS 

DEL AUTOGRAPO 
Y LOS CORRESPONDIENTES DE LA EDICTON DE REMON. 



Edici6n Rem6n. 
Suprimidos totalmente. 



"En el afto de mil y quinietos y cator- 
ze sali de Castilla en compafiia del Go- 
uernador Pedro Arias de Auila, que en 
aquella sazo le dieron la Gouernacion 
de Tierrar-Firme."-— Fol. 1 fte. 



Aut6orafo. 

Todo el primer folio y parte del segun- 
do estdn destinados d un predmbuh y 
varioi notidas auto-biogrdficas, 

"desde el ano de qiiinientos y catorze 
que vine de ca«tilla y comen^e a me- 
litar en lo de tierra firme y a descu- 
brir lo de yucatdn y nueba espaiia, y 
eomo mys antepasados, y mi padre y vn 
mi hermano sienpre fueron servidores 
de la corona, rreal, y de los rreyes ca- 
tholicos don hernando y dofia ysabel, 
de muy glorioea memoria, quise pare- 
5er en algo a Ellos y aql tienpo que fue 
ano de mill y quid's y catorze, como de- 
clarado tengo, vino por governador de 
tierra firme vn caballero que se dezia 
pedrarias dauila, acorde de me venir 
con el/ '—Fol. 2. fte. 

"la tierra [conquistada por Vasco Nti- 
nez de Balboa] de suyo es muy corta. ' ' 
—Fol. 2 vto. 

"anme preguntado ^iertoe caballeros 
curioeos q para q escrivo estas pala- 
bras q dixo El diego Velasqz sobre ven- 
demoB 8u nauio, porq paregen feas y 
no avian de yr en Esta ystoria, digo, q 
las pongo porq ansi conviene por los 
pleytos que nos paso El diego Velasqz 
y al obispo de burgos ar9obispo de rro- 
sano q se dezia don Joan rrodrigz de 
fonseca.''— Fol. 2 vto. 

"para q con buen fundamento fueae '* huvimos de lleuar vn Gerigo, 

Bemal Diaz del Castillo.— 12* 



*' de suyo esmuy corta, y de poca 

gente. ' ' — Ibidem. 



Suprimido. 



xc 



Aut6grafo. 

encaminada nra armada vuimoB de 
aver vn clerigo q estaua en la misma 
villa de san xpvl que se dezia alonso 
goiiQalez, El qual se fiie con nosotros/' 
— Ibidem. 

"Eleximos por vehedor a vn solda- 
do, que se dezia bernaldino yniguez, 
natural de santo domingo de la cal^a- 
da para q si dios nos encaminase tie- 
rras rricas, y gente q tuuiesen oro o 
plata, o perlas, o otras cualesquier rri- 
quezas, vviese entre nosotros persona, 
q guardase El rreal quinto." — Ibidem. 

'^vimos venir diez canoaa muy grandes 
que se dizen piraguas llenas de yn- 
dios.''— Fol. 8fte. 

"y entraron en la nao capitana sobre 
treynta dellos [indios] y les dimos a 
cada vno vn sartalejo de quentas ver- 
des. "—Ibidem. 

*'tenian Qos naturales de YucatAn] 
vnas arquillas chicas de madera y En 
ellas otros ydolos y vnas patenillas." 
— Fol. 3vto. 

"el clerigo gongalez que yba con no- 
sotros, se cargo, de las arquillas E ydo- 
los y oro y lo lleuo al nauio." — Fol. 
8 vto. 

''diez yndios que trayan las rropas de' 
mantaa de algodon largas que les dauan 
hasta los pies, y heran blancas, y los 
cabellos muy grandes Uenos de sangre 
rrebuelta con EUos." — Fol. 4 fke. 

**y paramos enton9e8 en las mientes, 
y pensar que podian ser aquellas pla- 
ticas."— Fol. 4fte. 

''nos pare9i6, que para cada vno de 
nosotros avia sobre duzientos yndioe." 
—Fol. 6 fte. 

"vimos venir por la costa muchos mas 
yndios guerreros. ' ' — Ibidem. 

"y le dieron [& Francisco Hem&ndez 
de C6rdova] diez flechazos. ' ' — Ibidem. 

"hallamos que £altavan sobre Qinquen- 
ta soldados, con los dos que Uevaron 
bibos, y 9inco ecbamos en la mar de 



Edici6n Rem6n. 

que estaua en la misma Villa de San 
Christoual, que se dezia Alonso Gonza- 
lez, que con buenas palabras, y pro- 
metimientos que le hizimos, se f\ie con 
nosotros." — ^Fol. 1 vto. 

" elegimos por Veedor en nombre 

de su Magestad a vn soldado que se 
dezia Bernardino Iniques, natural de 
Santo Domingo de la Calzada, para 
que si Dios fuesse servido que topasse- 
mos tierras que tuviessen oro, 6 perlas 
6 plata, huviesse persona suficiete que 
guardasse el Real quinto." — Ibidem. 

" dnco canoas grandes llenas de 

Indios."- Fol. 2 fte. 



" sobre treinta dellos; d. los quales 

dimos de comer ca^abe, y tozino, y k 
cada vno vn sartalejo de cuentas ver- 
des."— Ibidem. 

" vnas arquillas hechizas de ma- 
dera, y en ellas otros idolos de gestos 
diabolicos, y vnas potenillas." — Fol. 
2 vto. 

** Gonzalez iba con nosotros, y con 

dos Indios de Cuba, se carg6 de las ar- 
quillas, y el oro, y los idolos, etc" — 
Fol. 2 vto. 

" que traian las rropas de mautas 

de algodon largas, y blancas, y los ca- 
bellos muy grandes llenos de sangre, y 
muy rebueltos los vnos con los otros." 
—Fol. 8 fte. 

" y entoces pararitos en las mieses, 

y en pesar, que podia ser aquella pla- 
tica."— Fol. 8 vto. 

" y por otra parte viamos, quep%- 

ra cada vno de nosotros auia trezien- 
tos Indios. " — ^Ibidem. 

" muchos mas esquadrones gue- 

rrerOs. ' ' — ^Ibidem. 

" y le dieron doze flechazos." — 

Ibidem. 

" £Eiltauan cincuenta y siete com- 

pafieros con los dos que lleuaron viuos, 
y con cinco que eduimos en la mar, 



xa 



ATn60RAF0. 

ay a poooe dias, que se murieron." — 
Ibidem. 

•'avria ya catorze o quinze afioe." — 
FoL 6 fte. 

"auian herido quatro marineros, y al 
piloto alaminos en la garganta. ' ' — Fol. 
6 fte. 

"Otros dezian que beran [loe idolos y 
otroe objetos de los naturales de Am^ 
rica] de los judios que desterro tito y 
vespa^iano de Jerusalen, y que loe 
Echo por la mar adelante en 9ierto8 
nauios q auian aportado en aquella 
tierra.'*— Fol. 7 fte. 



Nada dice. 



"por nra quenta ballamos q murieron 
(inquenta y siete [de los castellanos 
que formaron la expedici6n de Her- 
nindez de C6rdova].*' — Ibidem. 

"nos apergebimos destar sin rropa nin- 
guna.'* — Fol. 7 vto. 

Nada dice. 



"y en tonnes [cuando se organiz6 la ex- 
pedici6n de Juan de Gry alva] me man- 
do diego Yelasqz q uiniese con aquellos 
capitanes por alferes." — Fol. 8 fte. 

"otro [pUoto] que se dezia sopuesta, 
natural de moguer.'' — ^Ibidem. 

"pues antes que meta la pluma en lo 
deloe Capitanes." — Ibidem. 

"antes q aqlla ysla de cuba se conquis- 
taae, Dio al travez vn navio en aquella 
oosta, 9erca del rrio y puerto q E dbo 
q se dize de matangas." — Fol. 8 vto. 



EDia6N Rem6n. 



que murieron de lasberida [sic]." — 
Fol. 4 fte. 

^'auia diez, d doze anos ya passados.'' 
—FoL 4 vto. 

** y al Piloto Alaminos la [sic] 

dieron vna mala berida en la gargata. ' ' 
—Fol. 5 fte. 

" que eran de los Indios q desterrd 

Tito y Vespasiano de Jerusalem, y que 
auian aportado con los nauios rotos 
en que les ecboron [sic] en aquella 
tierra.'*— Fol: 5 vto. 



"aun lo tuvimos a buena dicba auer 
buelto, y no quedar muertos c6 los 
demas mis copaneros." — Ibidem. 

** murieron al pie de sesenta sol- 
dados. ' ' — Ibidem. 



*' sm ropa mnguna, 

dos.'* — Ibidem. 



sino desnu- 



"y con el gran viento que bazia He- 
uauamos becbas grietas en las partes 
ocultas, que corria sangre dellas, aun- 
que nos auiamos puesto delante mu- 
cbas bojas de arboles y otras yervas 
que buscamos para nos tapar.'' — Fol. 
6 fte. 

Stqnimido, 



*'otro Piloto que entonces vino, no me 
acuerdo el nombre." — Fol. 6 vto. 

''Pues antes que mas passe adelante. " 
— Ibidem. 

"Antes que aquella Isla de Cuba es- 
tuviesse de paz, di6 al traues por la 
costa del Norte vn nauio que auia ido 
desde la Isla de Santo Domingo d bus- 
car Indios, que llamauan los Lucayos, 
& vnas Islas que estan entre Cuba, y la 
Canal de Babama, que se llaman las 
Islas de los Lucayos y con el mal tiepo 



xcn 



Aitt6grafo. 



**otro 8e dezia cascorro, honbre de la 
mar, natural de moguer mucho me E 
detenido en contar cosas viejas/* — Ibi- 
dem. 



"despues de aiier oj-do misa, En ocbo 
dias del mes de abril del aiio de qui^s 
y diez y ocho anos, dimos vela, y en 
diez Dias doblamos la punta de giiani- 
guanico que por otro nonbre se llama 
de santo anion, y dentro en diez dias 
q nauegamos vimos la ysla de cosu- 
mel/'— Ibidem. 

* 'pusimos nonbre a este pueblo santa 
cruz, porq fue dia de santa cruz quan- 
do en el entramos.'* — Fol. 9 fte. 

"Ian9a8, tan largas como las nras y 
otras menores, y rodelas y macanas, 
y espadas como de a dos manos.^' — 
Ibidem. 

''En esta guerra mataron a siete sol- 
dados y entre ellos a vn joan de qui- 
teria, persona principal y al capitan 
joan de grijalba le dieron enton9es tres 
flediazos y le quebraron dos dientes, 
y birieron sobre scsenta de los nros.'* 
-^Ibidem. 

* 'estuuimos en aquel pueblo tres dias. ' ' 
—Fol. 9 vto. 

''alii se nos quedo la lebrela, llaman 
los marineros a este puerto, de termi- 
nos.'* — Ibidem. 

"oymos El gran rremor de cortar ma- 
dera de q hazian grandcs manparos, 
E fuer9as y palizadas, y adere9arse pa- 
ra nos dar guerra, por muy ^ierta.'' — 
Ibidem. 



"El rrio de tonala.''— Fol. 10 vto. 
"aquellas tierras de la nueua cspaiia 



Edici6n Rem6k. 

di6 al traues en aquella costa, cerca 
del rio, y puerto que be dicho que se 
llama Matangas.'' — Ibidem. 

"otro se dezia Cascorro, bombre de la 
mar, y era pescador natural de Huelua, 
y le auia ya casado el Cacique, con 
quien solia estar, con vna su bija, 6 ya 
tenia horadadas las orejas, y las nari- 
zes como los Indios. Mucho me he de- 
tenido en contar cuentos viejos." — 
Ibidem. 

"despues de auer oido Missa con gran 
deuocion, en cinco dias del mes de 
Abril de mil y quinientos y diez y ocho 
anos dimos vela, y en diez dias dobla- 
mos la puta de Guaniguanico, que los 
Pilotos llaman de San Anton: y en 
otros ocho dias que nauegamos vimos 
la Isla de Co^umel.'* — Ibidem. 

"pusimos por nombre Santa Cruz; 
porq quatro 5 cinco dias antes de San- 
ta Cruz le vimos." — Fol. 7 fte. 

"lan^as, rodelas, macanas y espadas 
de dos manos." — Ibidem. 



"En esta guerra mataron & Juan de 
Quiteria, y k otros dos soldados, y al 
Capitan luan de Grijalva le dieron tres 
fiechazos, y aun le quebraron con vn 
cobaco dos dietes (que ay niuchos en 
aquella costa) 6 birieron sobre sesenta 
de los nuestros.*' — Fol. 7 vto. 

"Estuuimos en aquel pueblo quatfo 
dias.'' — Ibidem. 

"se nos quedd alii la lebrela, y quando 
bolvimos c6 Cortes, la tomamos & ha- 
Uar."— Ibidem. 

"oimos el rumor de cortar madera, de 
que hazian grandes mamparos, ^ flier- 
gas, y aderegarse para nos dar guerra; 
porque auian sabido de lo que passo 
en Potonohan, y tenian la guerra por 
muy cierta.*'— Fol. 8 fte. 

"el rio de Fenole." — Fol. 8 vto. 

"aquellas tierras, que son mayores que 



xcm 



Atjt6orafo. 

q son mayores que dos vezes nra cas- 
tiUa."— Fol. 11 fte. 

"truxeron mas de diez y seis myll pe- 
sos en Joyezuelas de oro bajo y de mu- 
cbas deversidad de hechuras, y aquesto 
deue ser lo que dizen los coronistas go- 
mora y yllescaa y jouio q dieron en ta- 
basco."— Fol. 11 vto. 



"no muy lejos desta ysleta blanca vi- 
mofl otra ysla, que tenia muchos arbo- 
les verdes, y estara de la costa quatro 
leguas y posimosle por nonbre ysla 
verde." — Ibidem. 

"eomo llegamos aquella ysleta, que 
agora se llama san joan de vlua. ' ' — Fol. 
12 fte. 

"feltauan ya treze soldados q se auian 
muerto de las heridas." — Ibidem. 



"acordamofl q fiiese el capitan pedro 
de alvarado en vn nauio muy bueno q 
9e dezia san Sebastian." — Fol. 12 vto. 



"yfiie ansi acordado por dos cosas la 
vna porque el joan de grijalba ni los 
demas capitanes no estaban bien con 
el por la entrada q hizo con su nauio 
en el rrio de papalote que entonyes le 
pusimos por nonbre rrio de aluarado, 
y lo otro porque avia benydo a aquel 
viaje de mala gana y medio doliente. " 
— ^Ibidem. 

"vinieron de rrepente por el rrio aba- 
xo obra de veynte canoas muy gran- 
des Uenas de yndios." — Fol. 18 fte. 

"y vanse derechos al nauio q les pa- 
res^io El mas cbico del qual era capi- 
tan fran • de montejo." — Ibidem. 

"y danle vna rrosiada de fleeba q le 
hirieron yinco soldados y Echavan so- 
gas al nauio, pensando de lo llevar y 
avn cortaron vna amarra con sus ha- 
chas de cobre y puesto q El aipitan y 
los soldados peleavan bien." — Ibidem. 



£dICI6n ItEM6N. 

quatro vezes naestra Castilla." — Ibi- 
dem. 

"truxerd mas de quinze mil pesos en 
joyezuelas de oro baxo, y de muchas 
hechuras: y aquesto deue ser lo que 
dizen los Coronistas Fracisco Lopez de 
Gomara, y Gogalo Hemadez de Ouie- 
do en sus Coronicas, que dizen que 
dieron los de Tabasco." — Fol. 9 fte. 

Suprimido, 



"Como Uegamos al puerto de San luan 
de Culva."— Fol. 9 vto. 



''faltauan diez de nuestros soldados, 
que se auian muerto de las heridas." 
— Ibidem. 

**acordamo8 que fuese el Capitan Pe- 
dro de Alvarado en vn nauio que se 
dezia San Sebastian, porque hazia agua 
aunque no mucha, porque en la Isla 
de Cuba se diesse carena, y pudiessen 
en ^1 traer socorro, 6 bastimento." — 
Fol. 10 tie, 

Suprimido. 



'*vinieron por el no diez y seis canoas 
muy grandes llenas de Indios." — Fol. 
10 vto. 

"y vanse derecbos al nauio mas pe- 
quefio, del qual era Capitan Alonso de 
Auila."— Ibidem. 

"dandole vna rociada de flecbas, que 
birieron a dos soldados, ecbaron mano 
al nauio, como que lo querian Ueuar, 
y aun cortaron vna amarra: y puesto 
que el capitan, y los soldados pelea- 
uan bien." — Ibidem. 



XCIV 



Aut6grafo. 



''mando [Grijalva] que sacado el Real 
quinto, lo demas fuese para el pobre 
soldado y valdria obra de giento y gin- 
qiienta pesos.'* — Fol. 18 vto. 

Nada dice. 



'Wi las coronicas de los ooronistas 
fran*^ lopez de gomora y las del dotor 
yllescas y las del jouio que hablan Ed 
las conquistas de la nueva espana, y 
lo que sobre EUo me pares^iere decla- 
rar, adonde ouiere contradi9ion, y lo 
propome clara y verdaderamente, y va 
muy diferente de lo q an escrito los 
ooronistas ya por mi nonbrados.'' — 
FoL 14 fte. 

**Estando escriuiendo En esta mi co- 
ronica acaso ui lo que escriucn gomora 
E yllescas y jouio en las conquistas de 
mexico y nueua espana, y desq las ley 
y entendi, y ui de su poligia y estas 
mis palabras tan groseras y sin primor 
dexe de escriuir En ella y estando pre- 
sentes tan buenas ystorias, y con este 
pensamiento tome a lee y a mirar 
muy bien las platicas y rrazones que 
dizen En sus ystorias y desde el pri^ci- 
pio y medio ni cabo no bablan lo que 
• paso En la nueua espana." — Ibidem. 



''tenian [los indios] sus armas de al- 
godon q les cubrian El cuerpo, y ar- 
cos, seetas, rrodelas, lan9as grandes, 
espadas de navajas, como de a dos ma- 
nos q cortan mas q nras espadas, y 
muy denodados guerreros." — Fol. 14 
fte. y vto. 

Nada dice. 



Nada dice. 



Edigi6n ItEM6N. 
.y no valia ocbenta pesos. " — ^Fol. 



11 fte. 



** [Diego VelAzquez] no dio ningun 
pueblo de Indios a su Magestad.*' — 
Fol. 11 vto. 

**vt vna Coronica del Coronista Fran- 
cisco Lopez de Gomara, y babla en lo 
de las conquistas de la Nueua Espana, 
6 Mexico, € lo que sobre ello me pa- 
rece declarar adonde huviere contra- 
dicion sobre lo que dize el Gomora, lo 
dir^ segun, y de la manera que pass5 
en las Conquistas, y va muy diferente 
de lo q escriue, porq todo es contrario 
de la verdad.** — Ibidem. 

' -Estando escriuiendo esta relacio, aca^ 
so vi vna Historia de buen estilo, la 
qual se nombra de vn Fracisco Lopez 
de Gomora, que babla de las conquis- 
tas de Mexico, y Nueva Espafia, y 
quando lei su gran retorica y como mi 
obra es tan grosera dex^ de escriuir en 
ella, y aun tuve verguenga q parecies- 
se entre personas notables: y estando 
tan perplexo como digo, tom^ & leer 
y & mirar las rayones, y platicas que 
el Gomora en sus libros escriui6, ^ vi 
que desde el principio, y medio basta 
el cabo no lleuaua buena reladon y 
vd muy cotrario de lo que fiie, h pas86 
en la Nueua Espana.*' — Ibidem. 

Supriraido. 



'^juro ame, que cada dia estauamos 
rogado k Dios y d, nuestra Senora no 
nos desbaratasse [los Indios] . ' ' — Ibi- 
dem. 

"[Esciibe Gomara] que vn Pedro Dir- 
cio file por Capitan quando el desba- 
rate que huvo en vn pueblo que le 
pusieron nombre Almeria: porque el 
que fue por Capitan en aquella entra- 
da, fue vn Juan de Escalante, que mu- 
ri6 en el desbarate con otros siete sol- 



xcv 



Aut6grafo. 



Ntuia dice. 



Nada dice. 



Edicion Rem6n. 



dadoe, h dize que vn Juan Velazquez 
de Leon fue a poblar & Guacualco, 
mas la verdad es aasi, que vn Gon9alo 
de Sandoval, natural de Auila lo fue & 
poblar. Tambien dize, oomo Cortes 
mand6 quemar vn Indio que se dezia 
Que^al Popoca Capitan de Monte9unia, 
sobre la poblacion que se quern d. £1 
Gomora no acierta tabien lo que dize 
de la entrada que fuimos a vn pueblo, 
h fortaleza, Anga Panga escribelo, mas 
no como passo. Y de quando en los 
Arenales al^amos k Cortes por Capitan 
General, y Justicia mayor, y en todo 
le engailaron. Pues en la toma de vn 
pueblo, que se dize Chamula, en la 
Prouincia de Chiapa, tampoco acierta 
en lo que escriue." — Fol. 12 fte. 

"Pues en lo de Juan de Grijalva, sien- 
do buen Capitan, les deshaze, ^ dismi- 
nuye [Gomara] . Pues en lo de Fran- 
cisco Hernandez de Cordoua aviedo el 
descubierto lo de Yucatan, lo passa por 
alto. Y en lo de Francisco de Garay, 
dize que vino el primero con quatro 
nauios de lo de Panuco antes que vi- 
niese con la armada postrera: en lo 
qual no acierta, como en lo demas. 
Pues en todo lo que escrive de quando 
vino el Capitan Naruaez, y de como le 
desbaratamos, escriue se^n 6 como 
las relaciones. Pues en las batallas de 
Taxcala basta que hizimos las paces, en 
todo escriue muy lexos de lo q passd. 
Pues las guerras de Mexico, de quan- 
do nos desbarataron, y ecbaron de la 
ciudad, h nos mataron 6 sacrificaron 
sobre ocbocientos y sesenta soldados: 
digo otra vez sobre ochocietos y sesenta 
soldados porq de mil y trecietos que en- 
tramos al socorro de Pedro de Aluarado, 
6 iuamos en aquel socorro los de Nar- 
uaez, 6 los de Cortes, q eran los mil y 
trezientos que be dicbo, no escapamos 
sino quatrocientos y quarenta, h todos 
beridos, y dizelo de manera como si n5 
fuera nada. Pues desque tomamos a 
coquistar la gra ciudad de Mexico, fe 
la ganamos, tapoco dize los soldados 
que nos mataron, h biriero en las con- 
quistas, sino q todo lo hallauamos, co- 
mo quie vA k bodas, y regozijos.*' — 
Ibidem. 

'^su Magestad se ha seruido oonocer 
los grandes, 4 notables seruicios q le 



XCVI 



Aut6grafo. 



'pues q sabemos q la verdad es cosa 
bendita y sagrada, y q todo lo q contra 
Ello dixeren va maldito mas bien se 
pare^e q El goinora fue aficionado a 
bablar tan loablemente del baleroso 
cortes, y tenemos por ^ierto, que le vn- 
taron las manos, pues q a su hijo el 
marqz que agora es le Eligio [dedic6] 
8U coronica, teniendo nro rreyysenor 
q con dr* se le aula de Elegir y Enco- 
mendar y auian de mandar borrar los 
sen ores del rreal Consejo de yndias, 
los borrones que en sus libros van es- 
criptos/'— Fol. 14 vto. 



Nada dice. 



£Dia6N Rem6n. 



hizimos los verdaderos eonquisl^ores, 
pues tan pocos soldados como venimoH 
i, estas tierras co el veturoso, y bue 
Capitan Hernado Cortes, nos pusinios 
k tan grandes peligros, y le gananios 
esta tierra, q es vna buena parte de las 
del nueuo mundo, puesto que su Ma- 
gestad oomo Christianissinio Rey, y 
senor nuestro, nos lo ha mandado mu- 
chas vezes gratificar, y dexard de ba- 
blar acerca dcsto porque ay mucho 
que dezir.'* — Ibidem. 

*'pues sabemos que la verdad es cosa 
sagrada: y quiero dexar de mas hablar 
en esta materia; y aunque aula bien 
que dczir della, 6 lo que ee sospcch6 
del Coronista, que le dieron falsas re- 
laciones quando hazia aquella HiKtoria : 
porque toda la honra y prez della la 
di6 solo al Marques D. Hernado Cor- 
t^s, € no hizo memoria de ninguno de 
nuestros valerosos Capitanes, y fuertes 
soldados: y bien se parccc en todo lo 
que el Gomora escribe en su Historia, 
serle muy aficionado, pues k su hijo el 
Marques que agora es, le eligid su Co- 
ronica, € obra, ^ la dex6 de elegir k 
nuestro Rey y senor/' — Fol. 12 vto. 

'*Y no solamente el Francisco Lopez 
de Gomora escriui6 tantos borrones, 6 
cosas que no son verdaderas de q ha 
hecho mucho dano & muchos escrito- 
res, € CJoronistas, que despues del Go- 
mora han escrito en las cosas de la 
Nueua Espana, como es el Doctor Illes- 
cas y Pablo louib, q se van por sus 
mismas palabras, y escriuen ni mas, 
ni menos que el Gomora, Por manera 
que lo que sobre esta materia escriuie- 
ron, es porque les ha hecho errar el 
Gomora. ' ' — Ibidem. 



r 



BERNAL DIAZ DEL CASTILLO. 



msToiii^ -vsztx^^x^s^i^ 



CONQUISTA DE LA NUEVA ESPANA 







OTANDO estado como los niuy afamados co- 
ronistas antes que comienyen a escreuir sus 
ystorias hazen primero su prologo y preanbulo 
con rrazones y rretorica muy subida para dar 
liiz y credito a sus rrazones porque los curiosos 
letores que las leyeren tomen melodia y saber 
dellas y yo como no soy latino no me atreuo a 
hazer preanbulo ni prologo dello, porq a me- 
nester para sublimar los Eroycos hechos y azanas q hezimos 
quando ganamos la nueba espana y sus provingias En conpa- * 
nia del valeroso y esfor5ado capitan don hernando cortes, 
que despues el tienpo andando por sus Eroycos hechos fue 
marquez del valle y para podello escreuir tan sublimadamen- 
te, como Es dino, fuera menester otra Elocuengia y rretorica 
mejor que no la mia mas lo que yo ui y me halle En Ello 
peleando como buen testigo de uista yo lo escriuire con el 
ayuda de dios muy llanamente, sin torQer a vna parte, ni a 
otra, y porq soy viejo de nias de ochenta y quatro anos, y E 
perdido la uista y El oyr y por mi ventura no tengo otra rri- 
quesa que dexar a mis hijos y desgendientes salbo esta mi 
verdadera y notable rrela§ion como adelante En ella veran, 
no tocare por agora En mas de de9ir y dar rrazon de mi pa- 
tria, y donde soy natural y en que ano sali de castilla y en 
conpania de que capitanes anduue militando y donde agora 
tengo mi asiento y bibienda — 



[CAPITULO I]. ComienQa la rrelaqion de la 
ystoria. — 




ERNAL diaz del castillo, vz^ E rregidor de la muy 
leal gibdad de Santiago de guatimala, vno de los 
primeros descubridores y conquistadores de la nue- 
va espaiia y sus provincias y cabo de honduras y de cuanto 

hay en esta tierra, natural de la muy noble e ynsigne 

villa de medina del canpo, hijo de fran?* diaz del castillo, 
rregidor que fue della, que por otro nonbre le llamaban el 
galan, que aya santa gloria, por lo que a mi toca y a todos 
los verdaderos conquistadores mis conpaneros que Emos ser- 
vido a su mag. en descubrir y conquistar y pagificar y po- 
blar todas las mas provincias de la nueva espafia, que es vna 
de las buenas partes descubiertas del nuevo mundo, lo cual 
descubrimos a nra. costa sin ser sabedor de ello su mag. y 
ablando aqui en rrespuesta de lo q an dho. y escripto per- 
sonas que no lo alcan§aron a saber ni lo uieron ni tener no- 
tigia verdadera de lo que sobre esta materia ay, propusieron 
salbo hablar al sabor de su paladar por muchos y nota- 
bles servigios porq no aya fama dellos tal estima co- 
mo son dinos de tener y avn como la tal calidad, no 

querrian los malos rretratadores que tos y rreconpen- 

sados como su mag. lo a mandado a sus vi tes y gober- 

nad(rres, y dexando estas rrazones aparte tan Eroycas 

como adelante dire no se olviden, ni mas la mente se 

conozcan ser verdaderas y porque se rreprueven los 

libros que sobre esta materia an escripto, porque van de 

la verdad y porque aya fama memorable de nros. con 

ystorias de hechos azanosos q a avido en el mundo justa 

tan 111!? se pongan entre los muy nonbrados q an acaescido 
rriesgos de muerte y heridas y mil cuentos de miserias, 



5 

posimos y aventuramos nras. vidas descubriendo tierras 

que xamas se auia tenido notigia dellas,y de dia y de noche ba- 
tallando con multitud de belicosos guerreros, y tan apartado 
de castilla sin tener socorro ni ayuda ninguna, salbo la gran 
misericordia de dios nro. sefior q es El socorro verdadero que 
foe seruido q ganasemos la nueua espana y la muy nonbrada 
y gran gibdad de tenuztitlan, mexico, q ansi se nonbra, y 
otras muchas gibdades y Provin^ias, que por sertantas, aqui. 
no declaro sus nonbres, y despues q las tuuimos pa9ificadas 
y pobladas despafioles, como muy buenos y leales vasallos 
seruidores de su mg somos obligados a nro. rrey E senor 
natural con mucho acato se las enbiamos a dar y entregar 
con nros. Enbaxadores a castilla y desde alii a flandes, don- 
de su mg en aquella sazon estaua su corte, y pues tantos bie- 
nes como adelante dire a rredundado dello y conversion de 
tantos cuentos de animas que se an saluado y de cada dia se 
salvan q de antes yvan perdidas al ynfierno, y demas desta 
santa obra tengan atengion a las grandes rriquezas q destas 
partes enbiamos en presentes a su mg. y an ydo y van coti- 
dianam*® ansi de los quintos rreales y lo que lleuan otras mu- 
chas personas de todas suertes, digo q hare esta rrelagion 
quien fue el primero descubridor de la provingia de yucatan 
y como fuymos descubriendo la nueua espana y quien fve- 
ron los capitanes y soldados que lo conquistamos y poblamos 
y otras muchas cosas q sobre las tales conquistas pasamos q 
son dinas de saber y no poner En olvido, lo qual dire lo mas 
brebe que pueda y sobre todo con muy gierta verdad como 
testigo de vista y si oviese de decir e traer a la memoria par- 
te por parte los eroycos a las conquistas, hezimos ca- 
da vno de los valerosos capitanes y fuertes que desde el 

principio en ellas nos haUamos, fuera men ester hazer vn 

gran declarallo como conuiene y vn muy afamado 

coronista q tuviera elocuencia y rretorica en el de- 

§ir, que estas mis palabras tan mal yo y estimar tan 

altamente como merege segun adelante lo que yo me 

halle y ui y entendi y se me acordare que tornaba 

yncunbrado y estilo delicado y se me yo lo escrivire 



6 

con la ayuda de dios con rreta verdad de los sabios va- 

rones que dizen que la buena rretorica es degir verdad 

y sublimar y dezir lisonjas axar a otros en espegial 

en vna relagion como esta-.. moria della y porq yo no 

soy latino ni se del arte no tratare dello, porq como 

digo no lo se batallas y pacificagiones como en ellas 

me halle porq yo soy el de cuba, de los primeros, en 

conpania de un capitan que se de§ia fran?^ truximos 

de aquel viaje giento y diez soldados, descubrimoslo 

ataron en la primera trra que saltamos q se dize la pun- 

ta de bio mas adelante que se llama chanpoton mas 

de la mitad de nros capitan salio con diez flecha- 

zos y todos los mas soldados a dos y a ndonos de aql 

arte ovimos de bolver con mucho trabajo a la ysla avia- 

mos salido con el armada y el capitan murio luego En lie- 
gando a tierra, q de los giento y diez soldados que veniamos 
quedaron muertos los §inquenta y siete, despues destas gue- 
rras bolvi segunda vez, desde la misma ysla de cuba con otro 
capitan que se dezia joan de grijalba y tuvimos otros gran- 
des rrecuentros de guerra conlos mesmos yndios del pueblo 
de chanpoton y en estas segundas batallas nos mataron mu- 
chos soldados y desde aql pueblo fuimos descubriendo la cos- 
ta adelante, hasta llegar a la nueua espana, y pasamos hasta 
la prouingia de panuco, y otra vez ovimos de bolver a la ysla 
de cuba muy destrogados y trabajosos, ansi de hanbre co- 
mo de se, y por otras causas que adelante dire en el capitu- 
lo que dello se tratare E bolviendo a mi quento, vine la ter- 
§era vez con el venturoso y esforgado capitan don hernando 
cortes, que despues El tienpo andando fue marqz del valle 
y tubo otros ditados digo que ningun capitan ni soldado pa- 
so a esta nueua espana, tres vezes arreo, vnas tras otras como 
yo por manera q soy el mas antiguo descubridor y conquis- 
•tador que a avido ni ay en la nueua espana, puesto quemu- 
chos soldados pasaron dos veges a descubrir la vna con joan 
de grijalva, ya por mi memorado y otra con el valeroso her- 
nando cortes, mas no todos tres vezes arreo, porq si uino al 
pringipio con fran?* hernandez de cordoua, no vino la segun- 



da con grijalba, ni la ter§era con el esfor§ado cortes, y Dios 
a sido seruido de me guardar de muchos peligros de muerte 
ansi En este trauajoso descubrimiento, como en las muy san- 
grientas guerras mexicanas, y doy a dios muchas gra§ias y 
loores per Ello, para q diga y declare lo acaesido en las mes- 
mas guerras y demas desto, ponderen y piensenlo bien los cu- 
. riosos letores q siendo yo en aql tienpo de obra de veynte E 
quatro aiios y en la ysla de cuba el gpvernador del la, que se 
dezia diego velazq? debdo mio, me prometio q me daria yn- 
dios de los priraeros que vacasen, y no quize aguardar a que 
me los diesen. sienpre tube Qelo de buen soldado, q hera obli- 
gado a tener, ansi para seruir a dios y a nro. rrey e senor y 
procurar de ganar honrra, como los nobles varones deven bus- 
car la uida y ya De bien en mejor no se me puso por delante 
la muerte de los conpaneros que En aquellos tienpos nos ma- 
taron, ni las heridas q medit nii, ni faf igas ni travajos q pa- 
se y pasan los que van a di s'(jlTi«4jDn ;is nueuas, como nos- 
otros nos auenturamos siend*^ tAir poc»s conpaneros, entrar 
en tan grandes poblaQione^ ' !■ rmfi 1^ nmltitud de belicosos 
guerreros sienpre fui adehmir y uo !iif*|quede rre^agado En 
los muchos vi§ios, que aula rii l;i y^In Hr cuba, segun mas Cla- 
re veran En esta rrela^ion. desde el ano de quinientos y ca- 
torze que vine de castilla y comen§e a melitar en lo de tierra 
firme y a descubrir lo de yucatan y nueba espafia, y como mys 
antepasados, y mi padre y vn mi hermano sienpre fueron ser- 
vidores de la corona, rreal, y de los rreyes catholicos don Her- 
nando y dofia ysabel, de muy gloriosa memoria, quise pare- 
§er en algo a Ellos y en aql tienpo que fue ano de mill y 
qui**s y catorze, como declarado tengo, vino por governador de 
tierra firme vn caballero que se dezia pedrarias dauila, acorde 
de me venir con el a su governa5ion y conquista y por acortar 
palabras no dire lo acaE5ido en el viaje, sino que vnas ve^es 
con buen tienpo y otras co contrario Uegamos a El nonbre de 
dios, porque ansi se llama, desde a tres o quatro meses ques- 
tauamos poblados, dio pestilengia, De la qual se murieron mu- 
chos soldados y demas desto todos los mas adolegiamos y se 
nos hazian vnas malas llagas en las piernas, y tanbien auia 



diferengias Entrel mesmo gobemador con un hidalgo q en 
aquella sazon estaua por capitan y aula conquistado aquella 
provin9ia el qual se dezia, bazco nufiez de balboa, honbre rri- 
co, con quien El pedrarias dauila caso vna su hija q se dezia 
doiia fulana arias de penalosa y despues q la vbo desposado, 
segun pares§io, y sobre sospechas q tubo del yerno se le que- 
ria alQar con copia de soldados para yrse por la mar del sur 
y por senten5ia le mando degoUar y ha5er just^ de yiertos sol- 
dados, y desque uimos lo que dicho tengo y otras rrebueltas: 
entre sus capitanes, y alcangamos a saber que hera nueuamen- 
te poblada y ganada la ysla de cuba, y que estaua en ella por 
gouernador vn hidalgo que se dezia diego velasquez, natural 
de cuellar ya otra vez por mi memorado, acordamos §iertos 
caualleros y personas de calidad de los que auiamos uenido 
con el pedrarias Dauila de demand^^lle li§en5ia para nos yr a 
la m1* de cuba y el nos la dio de buena voluntad, porque no 
tenia necesidad de tau(|gift}I dados como los q truxo De cas- 
tilla para hazer giu^ra^ porq no avia q conquistar q todo es- 
taua de paz que (I ViiJftcfti WfH^ de balboa, su yerno del pe- 
drarias, lo avia cnin^«iaifc$dp^# la tierra de suyo es muy corta, 
pues desque tuuiinoj^ In li^ngia, nos enuarcamos en vn buen 
nauio, y con buen tienpo llegamos a la ysla de cuba y fuimos 
a hazer acato al gobernador y el se holgo con nosotros, y nos 
prometio que nos daria yndios En vacando y como se avia ya 
pasado tres anos, ansi en lo que estuuimos en tierra firme E 
isla de cuba, y no auiamos hecho cosa ninguna, que de con- 
tar sea, acordamos de nos juntar 9iento y diez conpaneros De 
los que auiamos uenido de tierra firme y de los que en la ysla 
de cuba no tenian yndios, y congertamos con vn hidalgo que 
se dezia fran?* hernandez de cordoua, q ya le E nonbrado otra 
vez, y hera honbre rrico y tenia pueblo de yndios en aqlla ys- 
la, para q fuese nro. capitan, porq era sufigiente para ello, 
para ir a nra. ventura a buscar y descobrir tierras nuevas pa- 
ra en ellas enplear nras. personas y para aquel efeto conpra- 
mos tres nauios, los dos de buen porte y el otro era un barco 
que ouimos Del mesmo gobernador diego Velasq! fiado con 
condition q primero q nos lo diese, nos auiamos de obligar 



q auiamos de yr con aquellos tres navios, a vnas ysletas que 
estaban entre la ysla de cuba y honduras, que agora se Ha- 
inan las yslas de los guanaxes, y que auiamos de ir de guerra 
y cargar los nauios de yndios de aquellas yslas para pagar 
con yndios El barco, para seruirse de ellos, por Eselavos y 
desque vimos los soldados q aquello q nos pedia el diego Ve- 
lasqz no era justo, le rrespondimos, que lo q dezia no lo man- 
da Dios ni el rrey; que hiziesemos a los libres esclauos y des- 
que supo nro yntento dixo, q era mejor que no el suyo en 
yr a descubrir tierras nueuas, q no lo q El dezia, y enton5es 
nos ayudo con cosas para el armada anme preguntado gier- 
tos caballeros curiosos, q para q escrivo estas palabras q dixo 
el diego Velasqz sobre vendernos su nauio, porq pare^en feas 
y no avian de yr en Estaystoria, digo, q las pongo porq an si 
conviene por los pleytos que nos puso El diego VvIh^z y 
el obispo de burgos aryobispo de rtg^ino que se cl^zi^ ilp^ 
joan rrodrigz de fonseca y bolui^jjfola mi materiji. y deaq 
nos uimos con tres nauios y niauitk.tog6 de pan ca(;a^t', q se 
haze de vnas rrayzes, y conpr;iin^8,JuerciB, q costav:in u tres 
pesos, porq En aquella sazon iio^ amft «u la ysla de * uija ua- 
cas ni cameros porq Entonces sp ooraernava a pobLn , y con 
otros mantenymientos de azeite y^onpramos quentaa, y co- 
sas de rrescate de poca valia y buscamos tres pilotos, que el 
mas prin§ipal y el q rregia nra armada, se dezia anton dala- 
minos, natural de palos y el otro se dezia camacho de triana, 
y el otro piloto se Uamava joan albarez El manquillo, natu- 
ral de guelva, y ansi mesmo rrecogimos los marineros q auia- 
mos menester y El mejor aparejo q podimos aver, ansi de ca- 
bles y maromas y guirdalesos y anclas, y pipas: para llebar 
agua y todas otras maneras de cosas conuinientes para seguir 
nro viaje, y esto todo a nra costa y mingion y despues q nos 
ouimos rrecogido todos nros soldados, fuimos a vn puerto, 
q se dize e nonbra En lengua de yndios axaruco, en la van- 
da del norte, y estaua ocho leguas de vna uilla q Entonces 
tenian poblada q se dezia san xpvl que desde a dos afios la 
pasaron, a donde agora esta poblada la hauana y para q con 
buen fundamento fuese encaminada nra armada, vuimos de 

Bemal Diaz del CastdUo.— 2. 



10 

aver vn clerigo q estaua en la misma villa de san xpvl que 
se dezia alonso gon9alez, El qual se fue con nosotros, y de- 
mas desto, Eleximos por vehedor a vn soldado, que se dezia 
bernaldino yfiiguez, natural de santo domingo de la cal5ada 
para q si dios nos encaminase tierras rricas, y gente q tuuie- 
seh oro o plata, o perlas, o otras cualesquier rriquezas, vviese 
entre nosotros persona, q guardase El rreal quinto y despues 
de todo esto couQertado y oydo misa Encomendandonos a 
dios nro. senor y a la virgen santa maria nra. S^ su bendita 
madre, comen§amos nro viaje de la manera que dire. — 



Y CAPITULO SEGUNDO. como descubri- 
mns la prouingia de yucatan||Enochodiasdei 

ft^ tj jfebrero, df^l aao de mill y qui^s y diez y siete, sali- 
y^mStde la hauana del^Wfcito de axaruco, ques en la vanda 
ffl^l nnrto y en dozi diji^;^Mamos la punta de santo anton, 
'f\\\v por otro nonbre en ht^la de cuba se llama tierra de los 
guanatia-taveyes, que son vivh yndios como salvages y do- 
MSdft aquella punta y i^nestns en alta mar navegamos a nra 
Ventura hazia donde se^pone el sol sin saver baxos, ni corrien- 
tes, ni que vientos suelen senorear en aquella altura, con gran 
rriesgo de nras personas, porque en aquella sazon nos vino 
vna tormenta, que duro dos dias con sus noches, y fue tal, 
questuuimos para nos perder y desque abonanso, siguiendo 
nra navegagion pasados veynte E vn dias que auiamos sali- 
do del puerto, vimos tierra, de que nos alegramos, y dimes 
muchas gra§ias a dios por Ello, la qual tierra jamas se aula 
descubierto ni se aula thenido notigia della hasta entonges, 
y desde los nauios vimos vn gran pueblo que al pareger esta- 
ria de la costa dos leguas, y uiendo que hera gran poblason 
y no auiamos visto en la ysla de cuba, ni en la espanola pue- 
blo tan grande, le pusimos por nonbre el gran cayro y acor- 
damos q con los dos nauios de menos porte se acercasen lo 
mas q pudiesen a la costa para ver si abria fondo para que 
pudiesemos anclar junto a tierra y vna manana, que fueron 



11 

quatro de mar§o vimos venir diez canoas muy grandes que 
86 dizen piraguas llenas de yndios naturales de aquella pobla- 
zon, y venian a rremo y vela. | Son canoas hechas a manera 
de artezas y son grandes y de maderos gruesos y cauados de 
arte questa gueco y todas son de vn madero y ay muchas 
dellas en que caben quarenta yndios, quiero bolver a mi ma- 
teria llegados los yndios con las diez canoas 5erca de nros 
nauios, con senas de pas que les hizimos y llamandoles con 
las manos y capeando para q nos viniesen a hablar, porque 
ententes no teniamos lenguas que entendiesen la de yucatan 
y mexicana, sin temor ninguno vinieron y entraron en la 
nao capitana sobre treynta dellos y les dimos a cada vno vn 
sartalego de quentas verdes y estuuieron mirando por vn buen 
rrato los nauios y el mas priuQipal dellos que hera ca§ique di- 
xo por senas que se queria tomar en sus canoas y yrse a su 
pueblo, que para otro dia bolverian y trayrian mas canoas en 
que saltasemos en tierra y venian estos yndios vestidos con 
camisetas de algodon como jaquetas, y cubiertas sus verguen- 
jas con vnas mantas angostas que entre Ellos llaman maste- 
les y tuuimoslos por honbres de mas rrazon que a los yndios 
de Cuba porque andauan los de cuba con las verguen§as de 
fuera E5eto las mujeres que tray an hasta los muslos vnas rro- 
pas de algodon que llaman naguas. bolbamos a nro quento. 
otro dia por la manana boluio el mesmo cayique a nros na- 
uios y truxo doze canoas grandes, ya E dicho que se dizen 
piraguas, con yndios Remeros, y dixo por senas con muy ale- 
gre cara y muestras de paz, que fuesemos a su pueblo y que 
nos darian comida y lo que ouiesemos menester y que En 
aquellas sus canoas podiamos saltar en tierra entonzes estaua 
diziendo en su lengua cones cotoche, cones cotoche, que quie- 
re dezir, andad aca, a mis casas y por esta causa pusimos por 
nonbre aquella tierra punta de cotoche y ansi esta en las car- 
tas de marear pues viendo nro capitan y todos los demas sol- 
dados los muchos halagos que nos hazia aquel cacique fue 
acordado que sacasemos nros bateles de los nauios y en el 
vno de los mas pequenos y en las doze canoas saltasemos en 
tierra todos de vna vez porque uimos la costa toda llena de 



12 

yndios que se auian juntado de aquella pobla§ion, y ansi sali- 
mos, todos, de la primera barcada y quando el ca§ique nos 
vio en tierra y que no ybamos a su pueblo dixo otra vez por 
seiias al capitan, que fuesemos con el a sus casas y tantas mues- 
tras de pas hazia, que tomando el capitan consejo para Ello, 
acordose por todos los mas soldados que con el mejor rrecau- 
do de armas que pudiesemos lleuar fuesemos, y lleuamos quin- 
ce ballestas y diez escopetas y comengamos a caminar por 
donde el ca§ique yba con otros muchos yndios que le acom- 
panavan. E yendo desta manera, cerca de vnos montes bre- 
nosos comen§o a dar bozes el ca§ique para que saliesen a nos- 
otros vnos esquadrones de yndios de guerra, que tenia en 
§eleda para nos matar y a las bozes que dio, los esquadrones 
vinieron con gran furia y presteza y nos comengaron a flechar 
de arte, que de la primera rrosiada de flechas nos hirieron 
quinze soldados, y trayan armas de algodon que les daua a 
las rrodillas, y langas, y rrodelas, y arcos, y flechas, y hondas 
y mucha piedra, y con sus penachos, y luego tras las flechas 
se uinieron a juntar con nosotros, pie con pie, y con las Ian- 
gas a manteniente nos hazian mucho mal mas quiso dios, que 
luego les hezimos huyr, como conosieron el buen cortar de 
nras espadas, y de las ballestas y escopetas, por manera que 
quedaron muertos quinze dellos y vn poco mas adelante don- 
de nos dieron aquella rrefriega, estaua vna plageta y tres ca- 
sas de cal y canto, que eran cues y adoratorios, donde tenian 
muchos ydolos de barro vnos como caras de demonios, y otros 
como de mugeres, y otros de otras malas figuras, de manera 
que al pareger estauan haziendo sodomias los vnos yndios con 
los otros. y dentro en las casas tenian vnas arquillas chicas 
de madera y En ellas otros ydolos y vnas patenillas de medio 
oro y lo mas cobre, y vnos pinj antes, y tres diademas, y otras 
pegesuelas de pescadillos, y anades de la tierra y todo de oro 
baxo y desque lo ouimos visto, ansi el oro como las casas de 
cal y canto, estauamos muy contentos, porque auiamos des- 
cubierto tal tierra, porque, en aquel tienpo ni era descubierto 
el piru ni avn se descubrio de ay a veynte aflos y quando es- 
tauamos batallando con los yndios, el clerigo gongalez que 



18 

yba con nosotros, se cargo, de las arquillas E ydolos y oro y 
lo lleuo al nauio, y en aquellas escaramugas prendimos dos 
yndios q despues q se bautizaron se Uamo, el vno Julian y 
el otro melchior y entranbos heran trastauados de los ojos. 
y acabado aquel rrebate nos boluimos a los nauios y seguimos 
la costa adelante descubriendo hazia do se pone el sol, y des- 
pues de curados los heridos dimos velas, y lo que mas paso 
adelante lo dire— 



CAPITULO TERCERO. como seguimos la 
costa adelante hazia el poniente descu- 
briendo puntas y baxos y ancones y arre- 

Qlies||creyendo que hera isla como nos lo sertificaba el 
piloto anton dalaminos, ybamos con muy gran tiento, de dia 
navegando y de noche al rreparo, y en quinze dias que fui- 
mos desta manera, vimos desde los nauios vn pueblo, y al pa- 
re§er algo grande, y aula serca del gran engenada y baya crey- 
mos que abria rrio o arroyo, donde pudiesemos tomar agua, 
porque teniamos gran falta della, a causa de las pipas y va- 
sijas que trayamos, que no venian estancas, porque como nra 
armada hera de honbres pobres, y no teniamos oro quanto 
convenia, para conprar buenas vasijas y cables falto el agua 
y ouimos de saltar en tierra junto al pueblo, y fue vn domin- 
go de lazaro, y a esta causa posimos aquel pueblo por non- 
bre lazaro, y ansi esta en las cartas de marear y el nonbre 
propio de yndios se dize Canpeche, pues para salir todos de 
vna barcada acordamos de yr en el nauio mas chico y en los 
tres bateles, con nras armas, no nos acae§iese como en la pun-, 
ta de cotoche y porque en aquellos ancones y bayas mengua 
mucho la mar y por esta causa dexamos los nauios anclados 
mas de vna legua de tierra y fuymos a desenbarcar cerca del 
pueblo, y estaua alii vn buen poso de agua, donde los natura- 
les de aquella poblaQion bebian, porque en aquellas tierras 
segun Emos visto, no ay rrios, y sacamos las pipas para las 



14 

henchir de agua, y volvemos a los nauios. E ya questaban 
llenas y nos queriamos enbarcar, uinieron del pueblo obra 
de ginquenta yndios, con buenas mantas de algodon y de paz, 
y a lo que pares5ia deuian de ser ca§iques y nos dizen por se- 
fias que que buscauamos, y les dimos a entender que tomar 
agua E yrnos luego a los nauios, y nos sefialaron con las ma- 
nos, que si veniamos de donde sale el sol, y dezian castilan, 
castilan, y no miramos en lo de la platica del castilan, y des- 
pues destas platicas nos dixeron por sefias que fuesemos con 
Ellos a su pueblo, y estuuimos tomando consejo si yriamos 
o no: y acordamos con buen con9ierto de yr muy sobre auiso, 
y llevaronnos a vnas casas muy grandes, que heran adorato- 
rios de sus ydolos y bien labradas de cal y canto, y tenian fi- 
gurado en vnas paredes muchos bultos de serpientes y cule- 
bras grandes y otras pinturas de ydolos de malas figuras y 
al derredor de vno como altar lleno de gotas de sangre y en 
otra parte de los ydolos tenian vnos como a manera de sena- 
les de cruzes, y todo pintado, de lo cual nos admiramos como 
cosa nunca vista ni oyda, y segun paresyio en aquella sason 
avian sacrificado a sus ydolos ^iertos yndios, para que les 
diesen vitoria contra nosotros, y andavan muchas yndias 
rriendose y holgandose y al pare9er muy de paz, y como se 
juntauan tantos yndios temimos no vbiese alguna sagalagar- 
da como la pasada de cotoche. y estando desta manera vinie- 
ron otros muchos yndios, que trayan muy rroynes mantas 
cargados de carrizos secos y los pusieron en un llano y luego 
tras estos vinieron dos esquadrones de yndios flecheros con 
lan§as y rrodelas, y hondas y piedras y con sus armas de al- 
godon, y puestos en congierto y en cada esquadron su capi- 
tan, los cuales se apartaron poco trecho de nosotros y luego 
en aquel ynstante salieron de otra casa, que hera su adora- 
torio de ydolos, diez yndios que trayan las rropas de mantas 
de algodon largas que les dauan hasta los pies, y heran blan- 
cas, y los cabellos muy grandes Uenos de sangre rrebuelta 
con Ellos, que no se pueden desparzir ni avn peynar si no se 
cortan, los quales yndios heran sacerdotes de ydolos, q en la 
nueva espana comunmente se llamavan papas y ansi los non- 



15 

brare de aqui adelante. y aquellos papas nos truxeron sahu- 
merios, como a manera de rresina que entre EUos llaman co- 
pal, y con brazeros de barro llenos de axcuas nos comen§aron 
a sahumar y por senas nos dizen que nos vamos de sus tie- 
rras antes que aquella lefia que alii tienen junta se ponga fue- 
go, y se acabe de arder si no que nos daran guerra y mataran 
y luego mandaron pegar fuego a los carrizos y se fueron los 
papas, sin mas nos hablar. y los que estaban apergebidos en 
los esquadrones para nos dar guerra, comengaron a silvar y 
a taiier sus bozinas y atabalejos y desque los uimos de aquel 
arte y muy brabosos, y de lo de la punta de cotoche avn no 
teniamos sanas las heridas, y avn se nos auian muerto dos 
soldados, que Echamos a la mar y uimos grandes esquadro- 
nes de yndios sobre nosotros, tuuimos themor, y acordamos 
con buen congierto de yrnos a la costa, y comengamos a ca- 
minar por la playa adelante hasta llegar gerca de vn pefiol 
questa en la mar y los bateles y el nauio chico fueron la cos- 
ta tierra a tierra con las pipas y uasijas de agua, y no nos 
osamos enbarcar junto al pueblo donde auiamos desenbarca- 
do, por el gran numero de yndios que alii estaban aguardan- 
donos porque tuuimos por gierto que al enbarcar nos darian 
guerra pues ya metida nra agua en los nauios y enbarcados, 
comengamos a navegar seis dias con sus noches con buen tien- 
po y boluio vn norte ques travesia en aquella costa, que du- 
ro quatro dias con sus noches, que estuuimos para dar al tra- 
ves q tan rresio temporal aula, que nos hizo anclar, y se 
nos quebraron dos cables que yba ya garrando el vn nauio, 
o en que trauajo nos vimos, en ventura de que si se quebrara 
el cable, yvamos a la costa perdidos, y quiso dios que se ayu- 
daron con otras maromas y guindalesas pues ya rreposado el 
tienpo seguimos nra costa adelante, Uegandonos a tierra 
quanto podiamos, para tornar a tomar agua, que como ya e 
dho las pipas que trayamos no venian estancas, sino muy 
abiertas, y no auia rregla en ello y como ybamos costeando, 
creyamos que doquiera que saltasemos en tierra la tomaria- 
mos de xagueyes o posos que cabariamos pues yendo nra de- 
rrota adelante, vimos desde los nauios vn pueblo, y antes del 



16 

obra de vna legua hazia vna engenada, que pares5ia mo, o 
arroyo, y acordamos.de surgir y como en aquella costa men- 
gua mucho la mar y quedan muy en seco los nauios, por the- 
mor dello surgimos mas de vna legua de tierra, y en el nauio 
menor, con todos los bateles, saltamos en aquella Ensenada, 
sacando todas nras vasijas para tomar agua y con muy buen 
congierto de armas y ballestas y escopetas salimos en tierra 
a poco mas de medio dia, y abria desde el pueblo a donde des- 
enbarcamos, obra de vna legua y alii junto aula vnos posos 
y mayzales y caserias de cal y canto llamase este pueblo po- 
tonchan henchimos nras pipas de agua, mas no las podimos 
Uevar con la mucha gente de guerreros que cargo sobre nos- 
otros, y quedarse a aqui, y adelante dire de las guerras que 
nos dieron. — 



CAPITULO QUARTO, de las guerras que 
alii nos dieron estando en las estan^ias y 
may sales por mi ya dichas||tomando nra agua 

vinieron por la costa muchos esquadrones de yndios del pue- 
blo de pontuchan, que ansi se dize con sus armas de algodon 
que les dava a la rrodilla, y arcos y flechas, y lan§as, y rro- 
delas y espadas, que paresen de a dos manos, y hondas, y 
piedras, y con sus penachos, de los q Ellos suelen vsar, las 
caras pintadas de bianco y prieto y enalmagrado, y uenian 
callando y se uienen derechos a nosotros, como que nos ve- 
nian a ver de paz y por seiias nos dixeron, que si veniamos 
de donde sale el sol, y respondimos por senas que de donde 
sale el sol veniamos, y paramos enton5es en las mientes, y 
pensar que podian ser aquellas platicas que nos dixeron ago- 
ra y auian dicho los de lazaro, mas nunca entendimos al fin 
lo que dezian. seria quando esto paso y se juntaron, a la ora 
de las auemarias y fueronse a vnas caserias questavan gerca, 
y nosotros pusimos velas y escuchas y buen rrecaudo, porque 
no nos paregio bien aquellas juntas de gentes, de aquella ma- 
nera, pues estando velando toda la noche oymos venir gran 



17 

esquadron de yndios de las estan^ias y del pueblo, y todos 
de guerra, y desque aquello sentimos, bien entendido thenia- 
mos que no se junta van para hazernos ningun bien, y entra- 
mos en acuerdo para ver lo que hariamos, y vnos soldados 
davan por consejo que nos fuesemos luego a enbarcar, y co- 
mo en tales casos suele acaeser vnos dizen vno y otros dizen 
otro, obo pare§er de todos los mas conpaneros, que si nos yba- 
mos a enbarcar, como heran muchos yndios, darian en nos- 
otros y avria rriesgo en nras vidas, y otros heramos de acuer- 
do que diesemos esa noche en ellos, que como dize el rrefran, 
que quien acomete ven§e, y tanbien nos parecio, que para ca- 
da vno de nosotros avia sobre duzientos yndios y estando En 
estos con§iertos amaneyio, y deximos vnos soldados a otros 
questuuiesemos con cora^ones muy fuertes para pelear y en- 
comendandolo a dios y procurar de salvar nras vidas ya de 
dia claro vimos venir por la costa muchos mas yndios gue- 
rreros con sus vanderas tendidas y penachos y atanbores y se 
juntaron con los primeros que auian venido la noche antes 
y luego hizieron sus esquadrones y nos sercaron por todas 
partes, y nos dan tal rrugiadas de flechas, y varas, y piedra, 
tiradas con hondas, que hirieron sobre ochenta de nros sol- 
dados y se juntaron con nosotros pie con pie, vnos con lan§as, 
y otros flechando, y con espadas de navajas, que parege que 
son de hechura de dos manos de arte que nos trayan a 
mal andar, puesto que les dauamos muy buena priesa de 
estocadas y cuchilladas, y las escopetas y ballestas que no 
paravan, vnas tirando y otras armando ya que se aparta- 
ron algo de nosotros, desque sentian las grandes cuchilladas 
y estocadas que les dauamos, no era lejos, y esto por nos fle- 
char, y tirar a terrero, a su saluo, y quando estavamos En 
esta batalla, y los yndios se apellidavan, dezian al calachuni, 
calachuni, que en su lengua quiere dezir que arremetiesen al 
capitan v le matasen y le dieron diez flechazos, y a mi me 
dieron tres y vno dellos fue bien peligroso en el costado is- 
quierdo, que me paso lo gueco, y a todos nros soldados die- 
ron grandes langadas, y a dos Uevaron bibos, que se dezia el 
vno alonzo boto y otro hera vn portugues viejo, y uiendo nro 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo.— d. 



18 

capitan que no bastava nro buen pelear y que nos §ercaban 
tantos esquadrones, y que venian muchos mas de rrefresco 
del pueblo, y les trayan de comer y beber, y muchas flechas, 
y nosotros todos heridos, a dos y a tres flechasos, y tres sol- 
dados atrauesados los gasnates de lan9adas y el capitan co- 
rriendo sangre de muchas partes ya nos auian muerto sobre 
ginquenta soldados, y uiendo que no teniamos fuer^as para 
sustentarnos ni pelear contra EUos, acordamos con coragones 
muy fuertes rronper por medio sus batallones y acoxernos a 
los bateles que teniamos en la costa, questavan muy a mano 
el qual fue buen socorro, y hechos todos nosotros vn esqua- 
dron, rronpimos por ellos pues oyr la grita y siluos y bozeria 
y priesa que nos davan de fiechazos y a manteniente con sus 
langas, hiriendo sienpre en nosotros, pues otro dano tuuimos, 
que como nos acogimos de golpe a los bateles y heramos mu- 
chos, no nos podiamos sustentar y ybanse a fondo y como 
mejor podimos, azidos a los bordos, y entre dos aguas, medio 
nadando, llegamos al nauio de menos porte que ya benia con 
gran priesa a nos socorrer y al enbarcar hirieron muchos de 
nros soldados, En espegial a los que yban azidos a las popas 
de los bateles, y les tiravan a terrero y avn entravan en la 
mar con las lan§as y davan a mantiniente y con mucho tra- 
uajo quiso dios que escapamos con las uidas de poder de aque- 
llas gentes, pues ya enbarcados en los nauios hallamos que 
faltavan sobre cinquenta soldados, con los dos que llevaron 
bibos, y §inco echamos en la mar de ay a pocos dias, que se 
murieron de las heridas y de gran §ed que pasavamos, y es- 
tuuimos peleando en aquellas batallas obra de vn ora. 11a- 
mase este pueblo potonchan, y en las cartas del marear le 
pusieron por nonbre los pilotos y marineros costa de mala 
pelea y desque nos uimos en salvo de aquellas rrefriegas di- 
mos muchas gragias a dios, pues cuando nos curavamos los 
soldados las heridas, se quejaban algunos dellos del dolor que 
sentian, que como se avian rresfriado, y con el agua salada 
estaban muy hinchados y giertos soldados maldezian al pi- 
loto anton de alaminos, y a su uiaje y descubrimiento de ys- 
la, porque sienpre porfiaba que no hera tierra firme donde 
lo dejare y dire lo que mas nos acae§io — 



19 



CAPITULO QUINTO como acordamos de 
nos bolver a la ysla de cuba, y de los gran- 
des trauaxos que tuuimos hasta Uegar al 
puerto de la hauana. — 




ESPUES que nos uimos en los nauios, de la man era 
que dho. tengo, dimos muchas gragias a dios y cura- 
dos los heridos, que no quedo honbre de quantos alii 
nos hallamos, que no tuuiesen a dos, y a tres y a quatro he- 
ridas, y el capitan con diez, solo vn soldado quedo sin herir, 
acordamos de nos bolver a cuba y como estavan heridos to- 
dos los mas de los marineros, no teniamos qui en marease las 
velas, dexamos vn navio de menos porte en la mar, puesto 
fuego, despues de aver sacado las velas, anclas y cables y rre- 
partir los marineros, questavan sin heridas en los dos nauios 
de mayor porte, pues otro mayor dano theniamos, que hera 
la gran falta de agua, porque las pipas y barriles que thenia- 
mos Uenos en chanpoton, con la gran guerra que nos dieron 
y priesa de acoxernos a los bateles, no se pudieron llevar, que 
alii se quedaron, que no sacamos ninguna agua, digo que tan- 
ta §ed pasamos, que las lenguas y bocas teniamos hechas grie- 
tas de la secura, pues otra cosa ninguna para rrefrigerios no 
lo aula, o que cosa tan trauajosa es yr a descubrir tierras nue- 
vas, y de la manera que nosotros nos aventuramos, no se pue- 
de ponderar, sino los que an pasado por aquestos Ege^ibos 
travajos, de manera que con todo esto ybamos navegando muy 
allegados a tierra, para hallarnos en paraje de algun rrio o 
baya para poder tomar agua y desde a tres dias vimos vna 
ensenada que pare§ia ancon, y creymos oviese rrio o estero 
que tenia agua, y saltaron en tierra quinze marineros de 
los que auian quedado En los nauios, que no tenian heridas 



ningunas y tres soldados questauan mas sin peligro de los 
flechasos y llevaron asadones y barriles para traer agua, y el 
estero hera salado y hizieron posos en la costa, y tanbien hera 
tan mala agua y salada, y amargava como la del estero, por 
manera que mala y amarga truxeron las vagijas llenas, y no 
aula honbre que la pudiese beber y vnos soldados que la be- 
bieron, les dano los cuerpos y las bocas y auia en aquel este- 
ro muehos y grandes lagartos, y desde entonses se puso por 
nonbre el estero de los lagartos y ansi esta en las cartas de 
marear entre tanto que fueron los bateles por el agua, se le- 
vanto vn viento nordeste tan deshecho que ybamos garran- 
do a tierra con los nauios como aquella costa es travesia y 
rreyna el norte y nordeste y como vieron aquel tienpo los 
marineros que auian ydo a tierra por el agua, vinieron muy 
mas que de priesa con los bateles, y tuuieron tienpo de Echar 
otras anclas y maromas, y estuuieron los nauios seguros dos 
dias y dos noches, y luego al§amos anclas y dimos velas pa- 
ra yr nro viaje a la ysla de cuba y el piloto alaminos se con- 
certo y aconsejo con los otros dos pilotos, que desde aquel pa- 
raj e a donde estavamos, atravesasemos a la florida, porque 
hallava por sus cartas y grados y altura, questaria de alii obra 
de setenta leguas, y despues de puestos en la florida, dixo 
que hera mijor uiaje y mas sercana navega§ion para yr a la 
Havana, que no la derrota por donde aviamos venido, y ansi 
fue como lo dixo porque segun yo entendi avia venido con 
vn Ju** ponge de leon a descobrir la florida, avria ya catorze 
o quinze aiios, y alii en aquella misma tierra, le desbarata- 
ron y mataron al joan ponse, y en quatro dias que navega- 
mos, vimos la tierra de la mesma florida, y lo que en ella 
nos acae^io dire adelante. 



21 



CAPITULO VI. como desenbarcamos en la 
baya de la florida veynte soldados con el 
piloto alaminos a buscar agua, y de la gue- 
rra que alii nos dieron los naturales de aque- 
Ua tierra, y de lo que mas paso hasta bol- 
ver a la havana. — 

llegados a la florida acordamos que saliesen en tierra veyn- 
te soldados los que teniamos mas sanos de las heridas, E yo 
fui con EUos, E tanbien el piloto anton de laminos, y saca- 
mos las va^ijas que aula, e a§adones y nras ballestas y esco- 
petas, y como el capitan estava muy mal herido, y con la 
gran ged que pasaba, estaba muy debilitado, y nos rrogo que 
en todo caso le truxesemos agua du§e, que se secaba y muria 
de 5ed, porque el agua que aula hera salada y no se podia be- 
ber como otra bes E dicho. llegados que fuymos a tierra, ger- 
ca de vn estero que estaua en la mar el piloto alaminos rre- 
conos§io la costa y dixo que aula estado en aquel paraje, q 
vino con vn joan ponQe de leon, quando vino a descobrir 
aquella costa, y que alii les auian dado guerra los yndios 
de aquella tierra, y que les auian muerto muchos soldados, 
y que estuuiesemos muy sobre auiso apergebidos y luego pu- 
simos por espias dos soldados, y en vna play a que se hazia 
muy ancha hezimos pOsos bien hondos, donde nos paresgio 
aver agua dulge, porque en aquella sazon hera menguante 
la marea, y quiso dios que topasemos, buenagua, y con el ale- 
gria, y por hartarnos della, y lauar pafios para curar los he- 
ridos, estuuimos espacio de vna ora, E ya que nos queriamos 
venir a enbarcar con nra agua, muy gozosos, vimos venir al 
vn soldado de los dos que auiamos puesto en vela, dando mu- 
chas vozes diziendo, al arma, al arma, que uienen muchos 
yndios de guerra por tierra, y otros en canoas por el estero, 
y el soldado dando vozes y los yndios llegaron casi que a la 



22 

par con el contra nosotros, y trayan arcos muy grandes, y 
buenas flechas, y langas y vnas a manera despadas, y cueros 
de venados vestidos, y heran de grandes cuerpos y se uinie- 
ron derechos a nos flechar, y hirieron luego seis de nosotros, 
y a mi me dieron vn flechazo de poca herida y dimosles tan- 
ta priesa de cuchilladas y estocadas y con las escopetas y ba- 
llestas que nos dexan a nosotros y van a la mar al estero a 
ayudar a sus conpaneros, los que venian en las canoas, don- 
de estaban con los marineros, que tanbien andavan peleando 
pie con pie con los yndios de las canoas, y avn les tenian ya 
tornado el batel y lo llevaban por el estero arriba con sus ca- 
noas y auian herido quatro marineros, y al piloto al aminos 
en la garganta, y arremetiraos a Ellos el agua a mas de la gin- 
ta, y a estocadas les ezimos soltar el batel y quedaron tendi- 
dos en la costa y en el agua, veynte E dos dellos, y tres pren- 
dimos que estauan heridos poca cosa, que se murieron en los 
navios. despues desta rrefriega pasada, preguntamos al sol- 
dado que pusimos por vela, que que se hizo su conpanero, 
berrio, que ansi se Uamava, dixo, que lo uio apartar con vna 
hacha en las manos para cortar vn palmito, E que fue hazia 
el estero, por donde auian venido los yndios de guerra, y des- 
que oyo las bozes que heran despafiol, que por aquellas bozes 
vino a dar mandado, y que, entonges le deuieron de matar, el 
qual soldado solamente el aula quedado sin le dar ninguna 
herida, en lo de potonchan, y quiso su ventura que uino alii 
a fene§er, y luego fuimos en busca de nro soldado, por el 
rrastro que auian traydo aquellos yndios que nos dieron gue- 
rra, y hallamos vna palma que havi'a comen§ado a cortar y 
§erca della mucha huella, mas que en otras partes, por don- 
de tuuimos por gierto, que lo Uevaron bibo, porque no auia 
rrastro de sangre y anduuimosle buscando a vna parte y a 
otra, mas de vna ora, y dimos bozes, y sin mas saber del, nos 
boluimos enbarcar en los bateles y llevamos el agua du§e, 
con que se alegraron todos los soldados, como si ententes les 
dieramos las uidas, y vn soldado se arrojo desde el nauio en 
el batel, con la gran sed q tenia, tomo vna botija a pechos y 
bebio tanta agua q se hincho y murio dende a dos dias, y en- 



23 

barcados con nra agua, metidos los bateles dimos vela para 
la havana, y pasamos en aquel dia y la noche, que hizo buen 
tienpo, junto de vnas ysletas que Uaman los martires, que 
son vnos baxos que ansi los llamaron, los baxos de los mar- 
tires, y ybamos en quatro bra^as lo mas hondo, y toco la nao 
capitana entre vnas como ysletas, y hizo mucha agua, que 
con dar todos los soldados que alii ybamos a la bonba, no 
podiamos estancalla yvamos con temor no nos anegasemos, 
trayamos vnos marineros levantiscos y les deziamos, herma- 
nos ayudad a dar la bonba, pues veys que estamos todos muy 
mal heridos y cansados de la noche y del dia, y respondian 
los levantiscos, fa;etelo vos, pues no ganamos sueldo, sino 
hanbres, y sed, y travajos, y heridas, como vosotros, por ma- 
nera q les haziamos q ayudasen, y que malos y heridos co- 
mo yvamos, mareabamos las velas y dabamos en la bonba, 
hasta que nro senor nos lleuo al puerto de carenas, donde 
agora esta poblada la uilla de la hauana, que en otro tienpo 
puerto de carenas se solia Uamar y quando nos vimos en tie- 
rra, dimos muchas gra^ias a dios, bolbamos a dezir de nra 
llegada a la hauana, que luego tomo el agua de la capitana 
vn buso portugues, questava en aquel puerto, y escreuimos 
a diego velasq! governador muy en posta, haziendole saber 
que auiamos descubierto tierras de grandes poblagiones, y ca- 
sas de cal y canto, y las gentes naturales dellas trayan vesti- 
dos de rropa de algodon y cubiertas sus verguengas y tenian 
oro, y labran§as de mayzales, y otras cosas, que no me acuer- 
do, y nro capitan fran^^ hernandez se fue desde alii por tierra 
a vna villa que se dezia Santispiritus, donde hera \z^ donde 
tenia sus yndios, y como yba mal herido, murio dende a diez 
dias, y todos los mas soldados nos fuymos cada vno por su 
parte, por la ysla aDelante y en la havana se murieron tres 
soldados de las heridas, y nros nauios fueron al puerto de 
Santiago donde estaba el governador, y despues q obieron des- 
enbarcado, los dos yndios que vbimos en la punta de cotoche, 
que se dezia melchorejo y julianillo y sacaron el arquilla con 
las diademas y anadejos, y pescadillos, y otras pe§esuelas de 
oro, y tanbien muchos ydolos, soblimavanlo de arte, que en 



26 

que pasan las plantas de los pies y las olas q sienpre reven- 
tauan y dauan en nosotros, y aun sin tener que comer y por 
acortar otros trauajos, que podria dezir de la sangre que nos 
salia de las plantas de los pies y avn de otras partes, lo dexa- 
re y quiso dios que con mucho trauajo salimos a vna playa 
de arena, y dende a dos dias q caminamos por ella, Uegamos 
a vn pueblo de yndios que se dezia yaguarama, el qual en 
aquella sazon hera del padre fray bartolome de las casas, cle- 
rigo presbitero, y despues le conos^i ligen^ y frayle domini- 
co, y llego a ser obispo de chiapa y en aquel pueblo nos die- 
ron de comer, y otro dia fuimos a otro pueblo que se dezia 
chipiana, que hera de vn alonso de auila y de vn sandoual, 
no lo digo por el capitan sandoval de la nueva espana sino 
de otro natural de tudela de duero, y desde aquel pueblo fuy- 
mos a la uilla de la trinidad, y vn amigo mio, natural de mi 
tierra, que se dezia antonio de medina, me dio vnos vestidos, 
segund en la ysla se vsaban y desde alii con mi pobreza y tra- 
uajo, me fui a Santiago de cuba donde estaua el governador- 
y me rregibio de buena gra§ia, el qual andaua ya muy dili- 
gente en enbiar otra armada, y quando le fui a hablar y a 
hazer acato porque heramos devdos, se holgo conmigo, y de 
vnas platicas en otras me dixo, que si estava bueno para vol- 
ver a yucatan y rriyendome le rrespondi -^^v^j? quien le puso 
nonbre yucatan que alia no le Uaman ji^/^'fv.dixo que los 
yndios que truximos lo dezian yo rrespondi, *:k^ae mejor non- 
bre seria la tierra donde nos mataron mas de la mitad de los 
soldados que a aquella tierra fuymos, y todos los mas salimos 
. heridos y rrespondio, bien se q pasastes muclios trauajos y 
ansi es descubrir tierras nuevas por ganar honrra, su mag os 
lo gratificara, y yo ansi lo escriuire y agora hijo bolve otra 
ves en la armada que hago, q yo mandare al capitan Joan de 
grijalva, que os haga mucha honrra y quedarse a aqui y di- 
re lo que mas paso — 

aqui se acaba el descubrimiento q hizo fran?* her* y en su 
conpania bernal dias del castillo, y digamos en lo que enten- 
dio diego Velasqz. — 



27 



CAPITULO VIIL como diego Velasq'- go- 
vernador de la ysla de cuba, ordeno de en- 
biar vna armada a las tierras que descubri- 
mos, y fue por capitan general della vn 
hidalgo que se dezia Joan de grijalva pa- 
riente suyo y otros tres capitanes que ade- 
lante dire sus nonbres. 




N el ano de mill E qui"s y diez y ocho, viendo el go- 
i-p» vernador de cuba, la buena rrelagion de las tierras 
^ que descubrinios, que se dize yucatan aCordo de en- 

biar vna armada y para Ella se buscaron quatro nauios, los 
dos fueron de los tres que lleuamos con fran?^ hernandez y 
los otros dos nauios conpro el diego velasquez nueuamente 
de sus dineros, y en aquella sazon q liordenaua El armada, 
hallaronse presentes en Santiago de cuba, donde rrecidia El 
velasquez, vn joan de grijalba, y vn alonso dauila, y fran^ 
de montejo, y pedro de alvarado, que auian ydo a §iertos ne- 
gogios con el go vernador, porq todos tenian Encomiendas de 
yndios en la raisma ysla, y heran honbres pringipales. con- 
gertose quel joan de grijalba, que hera devdo del diego Ve- 
lasquez, viniese por capitan general y q alonso dauila uiniese 
por capitan de vn nauio, y pedro de albarado de otro y mon- 
tejo de otro, por manera que cada vno destos capitanes puso 
bastimentos y matalotaje de pan cagabey toginos, y El diego 
velasq? puso los quatro nauios y gierto rrescate de quentas 
y cosas de poca valia, y otras menudengias de legunbres y 
entonges me mando diego Velasqz, q uiniese con aquellos ca- 
pitanes por alferes, ^ y como aula fama de las tierras q heran 

1 Borrado en el original: ''sargento/' 



28 

rricas, y auia en el las casas de cal y canto, y El yndio julia- 
nillo q llevamos de la punta de cotoche dezia que auia oro, 
tomaron mucha voluntad y codi§ia los vezinos y soldados que 
no tenian yndios en la ysla de uenir a estas tierras por mane- 
ra q de presto nos juntamos dozientos y quarenta conpane- 
ros, y pusimos cada vno de la hazienda que teniamos para 
matalotaje, y armas y cosas q conuenian, y En este biaje bol- 
ui yo con estos capitanes, por alferes, como dho tengo y pa- 
resgio 9er q la ynstru§ion q para Ello dio el gobernador fue 
segun Entendi, que rrescatase todo El oro y plata q pudiese, 
y si uiese q conuenia poblar o se atreuia a Ello, poblase y si 
no que se boluiese a cuba y vino por vehedor de la armada 
vno q se dezia penalosa, natural de segouia y truximos vn 
clerigo, que se dezia joan diaz, natural de seuilla, y los dos 
pilotos q antes auiamos traydo q se dezian anton de alaminos, 
de palos y camacho de triana y joan albarez el manquillo, de 
guelba, y otro que se dezia sopuesta, natural de moguer, pues 
antes que meta la pluma en lo de los capitanes, porque non- 
brare algunas vezes a estos ydalgos que E dho que venian en 
el armada, y pareyera cosa descomedida nonbralles secam** 
sus nonbres, sepan q despues fueron personas q tuuieron di- 
tados, porq p^ de albarado fue adelantado y governador de 
guathemala y comendador de sefior Santiago, y El montejo 
fue adelantado de yucatan y gouernador de Honduras. El 
alonso dauila no tubo tanta ventura como los demas, porq 
le prendieron fran§eses como adelante dire en el capitulo q 
adelante tratare, y a esta cavsa, no les nonbrare sino sus pro- 
pios nonbres, hasta q tuuieron por su mg los ditados por mi 
memorados, y quiero q bolvamos a nra rrelacion y dire como 
fuimos con los quatro nauios, por la banda del norte a vn 
puerto q se dize de matan^as, que esta 5erca de la hauana uie- 
ja, q en aquella sazon no estaua poblada la uilla donde ago- 
ra esta, y en aquel puerto tenian todos los mas vezinos de la 
hauana sus estangias, y desde alii se proveyeron nros navies 
del cayabe E carne de puerco, q ya E memorado que no auia 
vacas ni carneros porq hera nueuamente ganada aquella ys- 
la, y nos juntamos ansi capitanes como soldados para ha9er 



29 

nro viaje, antes q mas pase adelante, y avnq vaya fuera de 
nra ystoria quiero dezir por que cavsa llamauan aquel puerto 
matan9as, y esto traygo aqui a la memoria, porque me lo ha 
preguntado vn coronista, q habla su coronica cosas acaesidas 
en castilla, aquel nonbre se le puso por esto q dire, q antes 
q aqlla ysla de cuba se conquistase, Dio al travez vn nauio 
en aquella costa, §erca del rrio y puerto q E dho q se dize de 
matangas y venian En el nauio sobre treynta personas espa- 
iioles y dos mujeres, y para pasallos de la otra parte del rrio 
porq es muy grande y caudaloso, vinieron muchos yndios De 
la hauana y de otros pueblos con intengion de matallos, y de 
que no se atreuieron dalles guerra en tierra, con buenas pa- 
labras y halagos les dixeron que los querian pasar en canoas 
y lleuallos a sus pueblos para dalles de comer ya q yuan con 
ellos a medio del rrio en las canoas las trastomarony mataron, 
q no quedaron sino tres honbres y vna mujer q hera hermosa, 
y la lleuo vn ca§ique de los q hizieron aquella tray§ion, y los 
tres espafiolesrrepartieron Entresi y a esta cavsa se puso aquel 
nonbre puerto de matan^as. yo conoyi a la muger, q despues de 
ganada la ysla de cuba, se quito al cagique de poder de quien 
estaua, y la vi casada en la misma ysla de cuba en vna uilla 
que 86 dize la trenidad, con vn vei^ della que se dezia pedro 
Sanchez farfan, y tanbien cono^i a los tres espanoles, que se 
dezia el vno gonyalo mexia, ya hera honbre an5iano natural 
de xeres y el otro se llamaua joan de santisteuan y hera man- 
§ebo natural de madrigal, y el otro se dezia cascorro, honbre 
de la mar, natural de moguer, mucho me E detenido en con- 
tar cosas viejas, y diran q por dezir vna antiguedad, dexe de 
seguir mi rrela§ion bolvamos a Ella, ya q estauamos rrecogi- 
dos todos nros soldados, y dadas las ynstruciones, q los pi- 
lotos auian de lleuar y las sefias de los faroles para de noche 
y despues de auer oydo misa, En ocho dias del mes de abril 
del ano de qui^s y diez y ocho anos, dimos vela, y en diez 
Dias doblamos la punta de guaniguanico que por otro non- 
bre se llama de santo anton, y dentro de diez dias q naue- 
gamos vimos la ysla de cosumel, q Enton5es la descubrimos, 
porq descayeron los nauios con las corrientes mas baxo que 



30 

quando venimos con fran?^ hernandez de cordoua yendo q 
yuamos boxando la ysla por la banda del sur, vimos vn pue- 
blo de pocas casas, y alii 5erca buen surgidero, y linpio de 
arrecifes, sal tamos en tierra con el capitan buena copia de sol- 
dados, y los naturales de aquel pueblo se auian ydo huyen- 
do desque vieron uenir el nauio a la vela, porq jamas auian 
visto tal, y los soldados q saltamos a tierra hallamos en vnos 
mayzales dos viejos que no podian andar y los truximos al 
capitan, y con los yndios julianillo y melchorejo, q truximos 
quando lo de fran?^ hernandez, que entendian muy bien aque- 
11a lengua, les hablo, porque su tierra dellos y aquella ysla 
de cosumel, no ay de travesia de la vna a lo otro sino obra de 
quatro leguas, y todo es vna lengua y el capitan halago a los 
dos viejos y les dio vnas contesuelas, y les enbio a llamar a 
los ca§iques de aquel pueblo, y fueron, y nunca bol vieron 
pues estandoles aguardando vino vna yndia mo^a, de buen 
parecer, y comengo de hablar en la lengua de la ysla de xa- 
mayca, y dixo que todos los yndios E yndias de aquel pue- 
blo, se auian ydo huyendo a los montes de miedo, y como 
muchos de nros soldados E yo entendimos muy bien aquella 
lengua, que es como la propia de cuba, nos admiramos de ve- 
llary le preguntamos q como estaua alii, y dijo q abria dos 
anos que dio al trabez con vna canoa grande en q yuan a 
pezcar desde la ysla de xamayca a vnas ysletas diez yndios 
xaraaycanos y q las corrientes les echo en aquella tierra, y 
mataron a su marido y a todos los mas yndios xamaycanos 
sus conpaneros, y q luego los sacrificaron a los ydolos y el ca- 
pitan como vio que la yndia seria buena mensajera enbio con 
ella a llamar los yndios y caciques de aql pueblo, y diola de 
plazo dos dias para q volviese, porque los yndios julianillo 
y melchorejo, tuuimos temor q si se apartauan de nosotros, 
que se yrian a su tierra q esta 5erca, y a esta cavsa no osaua- 
mos enbiarlos a llamar con ellos, pues volvamos a la yndia 
de xamayca q la rrespuesta q truxo, q no queria venir nin- 
gun yndio, por mas palabras q les dezia pusimos nonbre a 
este pueblo santa cruz, porq fue dia de santa cruz quando en 
el entramos auia en el muy buenos colmenares de miel y bue- 



81 

nas patatas, y muchos puercos de la tierra, que tienen sobre 
el espinazo el onbligo aula en el tres pueblos, aqueste donde 
desenbarcamos, hera el mayor, y los otros, pueblesuelos mas 
chicos, Estauan En cada punta de la ysla El suyo, y esto yo 
lo ui y anduue quando bolui tercera vez con cortez, y terna 
de boxo esta ysla, obra de dos leguas, y boluamos a dezir, que 
como El capitan joan de grijalva vio que hera perder tienpo 
estar alii esperando, mando q nos enbarcasemos, y la yndia 
de xamayca se fue con nosotros, y seguimos nro viaje — 



CAPITULO IX. como fuemos la derrota se- 
gun y de la manera q lo auiamos traydo 
quando lo de fraii?° hernandez de cordoua, 
y fuymos a desenbarcar a chanpoton, y de 
la guerra que alii nos dieron y lo que mas 
auino. — 

pues bueltos a enbarcar, E yendo por las derrotas pasadas, 
quando lo de fran?* hernandez, En ocho dias llegamos En 
el paraje del pueblo de chanpoton, q fue donde nos desbara- 
taron los yndios de aquella prouincia, como ya dho tengo 
En el capitulo q dello habla, y como En aquella Ensenada 
mengua mucho la mar, ancleamos los nauios v'na legua de 
tierra, y con todos los bateles desenbarcamos la mitad de los 
soldados q alii ybamos, junto a las casas del pueblo, y los yn- 
dios naturales del y de otros sus comarcanos se juntaron to- 
dos como la otra vez, quando nos mataron sobre cinquenta 
y seis soldados, y todos los mas salimos heridos segun me- 
morado tengo y a esta cavsa estauan muy vfanos y orgullo- 
sos, y bien armados a su usansa q son arcos, flechas, lan§as, 
tan largas como las nras y otras menores, y rodelas y maca- 
nas, y espadas como de a dos manos, y piedras, y hondas, y 
armas de algodon, y tronpetillas y atanbores los mas dellos 
pintadas las caras de negro, y otros Colorado y bianco y pues- 



82 

tos en congierto, esperando En la costa para en Uegando q 
Uegasemos a tierra dar en nosotros y como teniamos ynspi- 
rienQia de la otra vez, llebauamos En los bateles vnos falco- 
netes, E yuamos aper9ebido8 de ballestas y escopetas pues 
llegados que Uegamos a tierra nos comenjaron a flechar, y 
con las lanQas dar a manteniente, y aunq con los falconetes 
les haziamos mucho mal y tales rro5iadas de flechas nos die- 
ron, q antes q tomasemos tierra hirieron a mas de la mitad 
de nros soldados, y desque vbieron saltado en tierra todos 
nros soldados, les hizimos perder la furia a buenas estocadas 
y cuchilladas y con las ballestas, porq avnq nos flechaban a 
terrero, todos nosotros llebauamos armas de algodon, y toda- 
uia estuuieron buen rrato peleando, y les hizimos rretraer a 
vnas 5ienegas junto al pueblo. En esta guerra mataron a sie- 
te soldados y entre ellos a vn joan de quiteria, persona prin- 
gipal y al capitan joan de grijalba le dieron entonges tres fle- 
chazos y le quebraron dos dientes, y hirieron sobre sesenta 
de los nros, y desq vimos q todos los contrarios se auian ydo 
huyendo, fuemos al pueblo, y se curaron los heridos y ente- 
rramos los muertos, y en todo El pueblo no hallamos perso- 
na ninguna, ni los q se hauian rretraydo en las cienegas, ya 
se auian desgarrado. En aquellas escaramugas prendimos tres 
yndios, El vno dellos hera prin§ipal, mandoles el capitan q 
fuesen a llamar al ca§ique de aquel pueblo, y se les dio muy 
bien a entender con las lenguas julianillo y melchorejo, q 
les perdonaban lo hecho, y les dio quentas uerdes para q les 
diesen en sefial de paz, y fueron y nunca boluieron y crey- 
mos q los yndios julianillo y melchorejo, no les deuieron de 
dezir lo que les mandaron sino al rrebes estuuimos en aquel 
pueblo tres dias. acuerdome q quando estauamos peleando 
en aquellas escaramugas por mi memoradas, q auia alii vnos 
prados y En ellos muchas langostas de las chicas, q quando 
peleauamos saltaban y venian bolando y nos davan en la ca- 
ra y como heran muchos los yndios flecheros y tiraban tanta 
flecha como granizos nos pare^ia q heran algunas dellas lan- 
gostas q bolauan, y no nos rrodelabamos y la flecha q venia 
y nos heria. otras veces creyamos q heran flechas, y heran 



33 



langostas q uenian bolando fue harto estoruo para nro pe- 
lear dexemos esto y pasemos adelante y digamos como luego 
DOS enbarcamos y seguimos nra derrota — 



CAPITULO X— como seguimos nro viaje y 
entramos en vn rrio muy ancho y grande 
que le pusimos boca de terminos, porq En- 
tentes le pusimos aql nonbre. 

yendo por nra nauega^ion adelante, llegamos a vna boca co- 
mo de rrio muy grande y cavdaloso y ancho, y no hera rrio 
como pensamos, sino muy buen puerto, y porq esta entre 
vnas tierras y otras y paresgia como estrecho, tan ancha bo- 
ca tenia, dezia El piloto anton dalaminos, q hera ysla y q 
partia terminos con la tierra y a esta cavsa le pusimos non- 
bre de boca de terminos, y ansi esta en la cartas De marear, 
y alii salto El capitan joan de grijalba en tierra, con todos 
los demas capitanes por mi memorados 3' soldados, y estuui- 
mos tres dias sondando la boca de aquella entrada y miran- 
do bien arriba y abaxo del ancon, a donde creyamos q uenia 
yua a parar, y no hallamos ser ysla sino ancon y muy buen 
puerto y aula En tierra vnas casas de adoratorios de ydolos, 
de cal y canto, y muchos ydolos de barro y de palo, y pie- 
dra q heran dellos figuras de sus dioses, y dellos de sus co- 
jno mugeres, y otros como §ierpes, y muchos cuernos de vena- 
do y creymos q por alii §erca avria alguna poblazon y con el 
buen puerto, q seria bueno para poblar, lo qual no fue ansi, 
questaua muy despoblado, porq aquellos adoratorios heran de 
mercaderes y ca5adores q de pasada entravan En aquel puer- 
to con canoas y alii sacrificauan y aula mucha ca§a de vena- 
dos y conexos y matamos diez venados con vna lebrela y 
muchos conejos, y luego desq todo fue uisto y sondado, nos 
tornamos a enbarcar, y alii se nos quedo la lebrela, llaman 
los marineros a este puerto, de terminos y bueltos a enbarcar 

Bernal Dlax del Castlllo.-fi. 



34 



nauegamos costa a costa junto a tierra, hasta q llegamos a vn 
rrio, q llaman de tabasco q alii le pusimos nonbre Rio de 
grijalba — 



CAPITULO [XI] como llegamos a] rrio de 
tabasco, q llaman de grijalva, y lo q alii nos 
auino. — 

navegando costa a costa la uia del poniente, y nra nauega- 
yion hera de dia, porq de noche no osauamos por temor de 
baxos y arre^ifes, a cabo de tres dias uimos vna uoca de rrio 
muy ancha, y llegamos gerca de tierra con los nauios y pa- 
re§ia vn buen puerto, y como nos fuymos agercando Qerca de 
la boca uimos rreuentar los baxos antes de entrar en el rrio, 
y alii sacamos los bateles y con la sonda en la mano, lialla- 
mos q no podian entrar en el puerto los dos nauios de mayor 
porte fue acordado q anclasen fuera en la mar y con los otros 
dos nauios q demandauan menos agua, q con EUos y con los 
bateles fuesemos todos los soldados El rrio arriba, por cavsa 
q vimos muchos yndios estar En canoas En las rriberas, y 
tenian arcos y flechas y todas sus armas, segun y de la ma- 
nera de chanpoton, por donde Entendimos q aula por alii 
algun pueblo grande y tanbien porq viniendo como uenia- 
mos nauegando costa a costa, auiamos visto Echadas nasas 
con^ q pescaban en la mar, y avn a dos dellas se les tomo El 
pescado con vn batel que trayamos a jorro de la capitana 
aqueste rrio se llama de tabasco, porq El ca9ique de aquel 
pueblo, se dezia tabasco. E como lo descubrimos deste uiaje y 
El joan de grijalba fue el descubridor se nonbra rrio de gri- 
jalba, y ansi esta en las cartas de marear tornemos a nra rre- 
lacion q ya q llegavamos obra de media legua del pueblo, 
bien oymos El gran rremor de cortar madera de q hazian 
grandes manparos, E fuer§as y palizadas, y adere9arse para 
nos dar guerra, por muy gierta y desque aquello sentimos, 
desenbarcamos en vna punta de aquella tierra, adonde auia 



85 

vnos palmares, q hera del pueblo media legua, y desq nos 
vieron entrar, vinieron obra de ginquenta canoas con gente 
de guerra, y trayan arcos, flechas y armas de algodon, rrode- 
las y lanyas, y sus atanbores y penachos y estauan entre los 
esteros, otras muchas canoas Uenas de guerreros, y estuuie- 
ron algo apartados de nosotros, que no osaron Uegar como los 
primeros y desque los vimos de aql arte, estauamos para ti- 
ralles con los tiros y con las escopetas y ballestas, y quiso nro 
senor q acordamos de los llamar, E con julianillo y melchio- 
rejo, q sabian muy bien aquella lengua, se les dixo q no ouie- 
sen miedo, q les queriamos hablar cosas q desq las entendie- 
sen, avrian por buena nra llegada alii E a sus casas, E que les 
queriamos dar de las cosas q trayamos y como entendieron 
la platica uinieron ^erca de nosotros quatro canoas y En ellas 
obra de treynta yndios, y luego se les mostro sartalejos de 
quentas uerdes y espejuelos y diamantes azules, y desq lo uie- 
ron paresgia qstauan de mejor senblante, creyendo q heran 
chalchivies q Ellos tienen En mucho, Enton§es El capitan 
1^ dixo con las lenguas julianillo y melchiorejo, q veniamos 
de lejos tierras, y heramos va5allos de vn gran enperador q 
se dize don carlos, El qual tiene por vasallos a muchos gran- 
dee senores y caciques, y q Ellos le deuen tener por senor, y 
q les yria muy bien En ello, y q a trueque de aquellas quen- 
tas nos den comida y gallinas y rrespondieron dos dellos q 
el vno hera principal y El otro papa, q son como sa§erdotes 
q tienen cargo de los ydolos, q ya E dho otras ve§es que pa- 
pas los llaman en la nueua espafia, y dixeron q darian El bas- 
timento que deziamos y trocarian de sus cosas, a las nras, y 
en lo demas, q sefior tienen, y que agora ueniamos y sin co- 
no8§erlos ya les queriamos dar sefior E que mirasemos no les 
diesemos guerra como en potonchan, porque tenian apareja- 
dos sobre tres xiquipiles de gente de guerra de todas aquellas 
prouingias contra nosotros son cada xiquipil ocho mill hon- 
bres, y dijeron q bien sabian q pocos dias auia q auiamos 
muerto y herido mas de dozientos honbres en potonchan, y 
q Ellos no son de tan pocas fuer§as como fueron los otros, 
y por esta cavsa auian venido a hablar para saber nra volun- 



86 

tad y aquellas palabras que les deziamos, q se lo yrian a de- 
zir a los caciques de muchos pueblos qstan juntos para tratar 
guerra o pazes y luego El capitan les abra§o En sefial de paz 
y les dio vnos sartalejos de quentas, y les mando q boluiesen 
con la rrespuesta con brebedad, E q si no venian q por fuer- 
9a auiamos de yr a su pueblo, y no para los Enojar y aque- 
llos mensajeros q Enbiamos hablaron con los cagiques y pa- 
pas, que tanbien tienen boto entre Ellos, y dixeron q heran 
buenas las pazes y traer comida y q Entre todos Ellos y los 
mas pueblos comarcanos se-buscaria luego vn presente de 
oro para nos dar y hazer amystades, no les acaesca como a 
los de potonchan y lo que yo vi y entendi despues El tienpo 
andando en aquellas provingias, E otras tierras de la nueua 
espafia, se vsaua enbiar presentes quando se tratan pazes, co- 
mo adelante veran y En aquella punta de los palmares don- 
de estauamos, vinieron otro dia sobre treynta yndios, y en- 
tre Ellos el ca5ique, y truxeron pescado a9ado y gallinas, y 
fruta de §apotes, y pan de maiz, y vnos brazeros con asquas 
y con sahumerios, y nos sahumaron a todos y luego pusieron 
en el suelo vnas esteras, q En esta tierra llaman petates, y en- 
§ima vna manta, y presentaron giertas joy as de oro, q fueron 
vnas como diademas y giertas joyas como hechura de anades, 
como las de castilla y otras joyas como lagartijas, y tres co- 
llares de quentas vaziadizas, y otras cosas de oro de poco va- 
lor, q no valia duzientos pesos y mas truxeron vnas mantas 
y camisetas de las que Ellos vsan y dixeron q rre§ibamos 
aquello de buena voluntad, y que no tienen mas oro q nos 
dar, q adelante hazia donde se pone el sol ay mucho y de- 
zian colua, colua y mexico, mexico, y nosotros no sabiamos 
q cosa hera culua, ni avn mexico, y puesto q no valia mucho 
aquel presente q truxeron, tuvimoslo por bueno por saber 
9ierto que tenian oro, y desque lo ouieron presentado, dixe- 
ron q nos fuesemos luego adelante, y El capitan joan de 
grijalba, les dio gra9ias por ello, y quentas verdes, y fue acor- 
dado de yrnos luego a enbarcar, porque estavan a mucho pe- 
ligro los dos nauios, por temor del norte, que es travesia y 
tanbien por a9ercarnos a donde dezian que auia oro — 



37 



CAPITULO XII — como seguimos la costa 
adelante hazia donde se pone el sol, j Ue- 
gamos al rrio que llaman de vanderas y lo 
que en el paso. — 

bueltos a enbarcar, siguiendo la costa, adelante dende a dos 
dias vimos vn pueblo junto a tierra que se dize El ayagua- 
lulco y andauan muchos yridios de aquel pueblo por la costa, 
con vnas rrodelas hechas de concha de tortuga, que rrelun- 
bran con el sol que dava En ellas, y algunos de nros solda- 
dos porfiaban que heran de oro baxo, y los yndios, que las 
trayan y van haziendo pernetas como burlando de los nauios 
como EUos estaban en salvo, por los arenales y costa adelante, 
y pusimos por nonbre a este pueblo la rranbla, y ansi esta en 
Jas cartas de marear. E yendo mas adelante costeando, vimos 
vna ensenada, donde se quedo El rrio de tonala, q a la buel- 
ta q boluimos, entramos En El, y le posimos nonbre rrio de 
santo anton, y ansi esta en las cartas de marear. E yendo mas 
adelante navegando, vimos donde quedaua El paraje del 
grian rrio de guagacalco y quisieramos entrar en lensenada, 
[no] por saber que cosa hera, sino por ser el tienpo contrario 
y luego se pares5ieron las grandes tierras nevadas q En todo 
El aiio estan cargadas de nieue, y tanbien uimos otras sierras, 
q estan mas junto a la mar, q se llaman de san martin, y pu- 
simosle aqueste nonbre, porque El primero que las vio desde 
los nauios fue vn soldado q se dezia san martin, hera veyino 
de la havana, que yva con nosotros y navegando nra costa 
adelante el capitan pedro de alvarado se adelanto con su na- 
uio y entro en vn rrio, que Enonbre de yndios se dize papa- 
loaba, y enton§es le pusimos nonbre rrio de alvarado, porque 
entro en el el mysmo alvarado, alii le dieron pescado vnos 
yndios pescadores que heran naturales de vn pueblo que se 
dize tacotalpa estuuimosle aguardando En el paraje del rrio 



88 

donde entro, con todos tres nauios, hasta que salio del, y a 
cavsa de aver entrado en el rrio sin ligengia del general, se 
enojo mucho con el, y le mando que otra vez no se adelan- 
tase de la armada porque no le aviniese algun contraste en 
parte donde no le pudiesemos ayudar y luego nauegamos con 
todos quatro nauios en conserua hasta q Uegamos en paraje 
de otro rrio, que le pusimos por nonbre rrio de vanderas, por- 
que estavan en el muchos yndios con langas grandes, y en 
cada langa vna vandera de manta grande rrebolandola y 11a- 
mandonos, lo qual dire siguiendo adelante como paso 



C APITULO XIII— como Uegamos en el pa- 
raje del rio de vanderas, y de lo q alii se 

niZO. ya abran oydo dezir en espafia algunos curiosos 
letores, y otras personas que an estado en la nueva espana, 
como mexico es tan gran gibdad, y poblada en lagua como ^ 
Venegia, y auia en ella vn gran senor que hera rrey En es- 
tas partes de muchas provingias y senoreaua todas aquellas 
tierras de la nueua espana, q son mayores que dos vezes nra 
castilla, El qual senor se dezia montezuma, y como hera tan 
poderoso, queria saber y senorear hasta mas de lo que no 
podia y tubo notigia de la primera vez q venimos con fran^ 
hernandez de cordoua, lo que nos acaEsio en la batalla de co- 
toche y en la de chanpoton, y agora deste uiaje con los mes- 
mos de chanpoton, y supo q siendo nosotros pocos soldados y 
los de aquel pueblo y otros muchos confederados que se jun- 
taron con Ellos, les desbaratamos, y como entramos en el rrio 
de tabasco y lo que en el pasamos con los caciques de aquel 
pueblo, y en fin entendio que nra demanda hera buscar oro 
a trueque del rrescate que trayamos y todo se lo auian lleba- 
do pintado En vnos panos que hazen de Enequen, que es co- 
mo de lino, y como supo que y vamos costa a costa, hazia sus 
provin§ias, mando a sus governadores, que si por alii aporta- 
semos con los nauios, que procurasen de trocar oro a nras 



39 

quentas, especial a las verdes, que pares^ian algo a sus chal- 
chuvis, que las tienen En mucho como esmeraldas, y '^bien 
lo mando para saber E ynquirir mas por entero de nra a per- 
sonas, y que hera nro yutento y lo mas 9ierto hera, segun 
Entendimos, que les auian dho sus antepasados, que auian 
de venir gentes de hazia donde sale el sol, con barbas, que los 
auian de senorear, agora sea por lo vno o por lo otro, estavan 
En posta y vela muchos yndios del gran motezuma, en aquel 
rrio con vnas varas muy largas y en cada vara vna bandera 
de manta de algodon blanca enarbolandolas y llamandonos, 
como que pares§ian heran senas de paz, q fuesemos a donde 
estauan y desque vimos, desde los nauios, cosas tan nueuas, 
nos admiramos y para saber que podia ser, fue acordado por 
el general con todos los mas capitanes, que Echasemos dos 
bateles en lagua y que saltasen en ellos todos los ballesteros 
y escopeteros y veynte soldados de los mas sueltos y prestos, y 
que fran?* de montejo fuese con nosotros, y que si viesemos 
q hera gente de guerra los que estauan con las vanderas, que 
de presto se lo hiziesemos saber v otra cualquier cosa q fuese, 
y en aquella sazon quiso dios que hazia bonanza En aquella 
costa lo qual pocas vezes suele acaE§er y como llegamos en 
tierra hallamos tres ca§iques, quel vno dellos hera governa- 
dor de m6te§uma, y con muchos yndios de su servigio, y te- 
nian alii gallinas de la tierra y pan de maiz, de lo q Ellos 
suelen comer, y frutas que heran piiias y §apotes q en otras 
partes llaman a los 9apotes mameies, y estaban debaxo de 
vna sobra de arboles e puestas esteras en el suelo, y alii por 
seiias nos mandaron asentar, porque julianillo El de la pun- 
ta de cotoche, no entendia aquella lengua ques mexicana, y 
luego truxeron brazeros de barro con asquas y nos sahuman 
con vno como rresina El capitan montejo lo hizo saber todo 
lo aqui memorado al general y como lo supo acordo de sur- 
gir alii con todos los nauios y salto en tierra con los capita- 
nes y soldados, y desque aquellos cagiques y gouernadores le 
vieron en tierra, y entendieron q hera El capitan general de 
todos, a su vsansa le hizieron gran acato, y El les hizo mu- 
chas queri§ias y les mando dar diamantes azules y quentas 



40 

verdes, y por senas les dixo, que truxesen oro a trocar a nros 
rrescates, lo qual luego El yndio gouernador mando a sua 
yndios, que de todos los pueblos comarcanos truxesen de las 
joy as de oro que tenian a rrescatar^ y en seis dias q alii estu- 
vimos, truxeron mas de diez y seis myll pesos en Joyezuelas 
de oro bajo y de muchas deversidad de hechuras, y aquesto 
deue ser lo que dizen los coronistas gomora y yllescas y jo- 
uio q dieron en tabasco, y ansi lo escriven como si fuera ver- 
dad, porque vista cosa es q en la provingia del rrio de gri- 
jalba ni todos sus rrededores, no ay oro, sino muy pocas jo- 
yas De sus antepasados dexemos esto y pasemos adelante, y 
es que tomaraos posesion En aquella tierra por su mg y des- 
pues desto hecho, hablo El general a los yndios diziendo que 
se querian enbarcar, y les dio camisas de castilla, y de alii to- 
mamos vn yndio que Uevamos en los navios, El qual despues 
q Entendio nra lengua, se boluio xpiano y se llamo fran?^ 
y despues le ui casado con vna yndia bolvamos a nra plati- 
ca, pues como vio El general que no trayan mas oro que rres- 
catar y auia seis dias que estabamos alii, y los nauios corrian 
rriesgo por ser travesia El norte y nordeste, nos mando en- 
barcar y corriendo la costa adelante, vimos vna ysleta que 
bafiaba la mar y tenia la arena blanca y estaua al pares§er 
obra de tres leguas de tierra, y posimosle nonbre ysla la blan- 
ca, y ansi esta en las cartas del marear, y no muy lejos desta 
ysleta blanca vimos otra ysla, que tenia muchos arboles ver- 
des, y estara de la costa quatro leguas y posimosle por non- 
bre ysla verde E yendo mas adelante vimos otra ysla algo 
mayor que las demas y Estaria de tierra obra de legua E me- 
dia y alii Enfrente della auia buen surgidero y mando El 
general que surgiesemos, y Echados los bateles en el agua, 
fue el joan de grijalba con muchos de nosotros los soldados 
a ver la ysleta, porque auia humos En ella j^ hallamos dos 
casas hechas de cal y canto bien labradas y en cada casa vnas 
gradas, por donde subian a vnos como altares y en aquellos 
altares tenian vnos ydolos de malas figuras, q heran sus dio- 
ses y alii hallamos sacrificados de aquella noche §inco yn- 
dios, y estauan abiertos por los pechos y cortados los bra§os 



41 

y los muslos, y las paredes de las casas llenas de sangre, de 
todo lo qual nos admiramos en gran manera, y pusimos non- 
bre a esta ysleta, ysla de sacrifi9ios, y ansi esta en las cartas 
del marear, y alii enfrente de aquella ysla saltamos todos en 
tierra y En vnos arenales grandes q alii ay a donde hezimos 
rranchos y chogas con rrama y con las velas de los nauios 
auian venido E allegadose En aquella costa muchos yndios 
que trayan a rrescatar oro hecho pezeguelas como en el rrio 
de vanderas, y segun despues supimos lo mando El gran mo- 
tezuma q viniesen con Ello, y los yndios q lo trayan estauan 
temerosos y era muy poco, por manera que luego el capitan 
mando que los navios al^acen anclas y diesen velas y fuese- 
mos a surgir enfrente de otra ysleta que estaua obra de me- 
dia legua de tierra, y esta ysla es donde agora es el puerto de 
la beracruz obra de media legua de tierra y dire adelante lo 
que alii nos auino. — 



OAPITULO XIIII— como llegamos aquella 
ysleta, que agora se llama san joan de vlua 
E a que cavsa se le puso aquel nonbre y 
lo que alii pasamos. — 

desenbarcados en vnos arenales hezimos cho§as, engima de 
los mas altos medanos de arena que los ay por alii grandes, 
per cavsa de los mosquitos, q auia muchos y con los bateles 
sondaron muy bien El puerto y hallaron que con el abrigp 
de aquella ysleta estarian seguros los nauios del norte y auia 
buen fondo, y hecho esto fuemos a la ysleta con el general 
treynta soldados bien apergebidos en dos bateles y hallamos 
vna casa de adoratorios, donde estaua vn ydolo muy grande 
y feo, El qual le Uamavan tescatepuca y aconpanandole qua- 
tro yndios con mantas prietas y muy largas, con capillas que 
quieren paresjer a las que traen los dominicos o los canoni- 
gos, y aqiiellos heran sagerdotes de aquel ydolo, q comun- 

Bernal Dlas del Castillo.— (. 



42 

mente en la nueva espana llamauan papas, como ya lo E 
memorado otra vez, y tenian sacrificados de aquel dia doe 
mochachos y abiertos por los pechos, y los coragones y san- 
gre ofresyidos aquel maldito ydolo y aquellos sayerdotes nos 
uenian a sahumar con lo q sahumaron aquel su tescatepuca 
porque En aquella sazon q llegamos lo estauan sahumando 
con vno q guele a Ensengio y no consentimos que tal sahu- 
merio nos diesen, antes tuuimos muy gran lastima de ver 
muertos aquellos dos muchachos, y ver tan grandigima cruel- 
dad y El general pregunto al yndio fran?* por mi memora- 
do, q truximos del rrio de vanderas, q pares5ia algo enten- 
dido, que por que hazian aquello, y esto se lo dezia medio 
por senas, porque entonges no teniamos lengua ninguna, co- 
mo ya otra vez E dho porque julianillo y melchorejo no En- 
tendian la mexicana, y rrespondio El yndio fran?^ que los 
de culua los mandauan sacrificar y como hera torpe de len- 
gua dezia vlua, vlua, y como nro capitan estaua presente y 
se llamaba joan, y hera por san ju^ de junio, pusimos por 
nonbre aquella ysleta, san joan de vlua, y este puerto es ago- 
ra muy nonbrado, y esta hechos en el grandes manparos pa- 
ra q esten seguros los nauios para amor de El norte, y alii 
vienen a desenbarcar las mercaderias de castilla para mexi- 
co y nueva espafia, bolvamos a nro quento, q como estaua- 
mos en aquellos arenales vinieron yndios de pueblos comar- 
canos a trocar su oro de joyas a nros rrescates, mas hera tan 
poco lo que trayan y de poca valia, que no haziamos quenta 
dello, y estuvimos siete dias de la manera q E dho y con los 
muchos mosquitos q auia no nos podiamos valer, y viendo 
que el tienpo se nos pasaua en balde, y teniendo ya por §ier- 
to que aquellas tierras no heran yslas sino tierra firme, y q 
auia grandes pueblos y mucha multitud de yndios, y El pan 
cagabi que trayamos muy mohoso y suzio de fatulas y amar- 
gaua, y los soldados q alii veniamos no heramos bastantes 
para poblar, quanto mas que faltauan ya treze soldados q se 
auian muerto de las heridas y estauan otros quatro dolien- 
tes y viendo todo esto por mi ya dho fue acordado que lo en- 
uiasemos a hazer saber al diego Velasquez, para q nos enbiase 



43 

socorro, porque joan de grijalba muy gran voluntad tenia De 
poblar con aquellos pocos soldadoe q con el estavamos y sien- 
pre mostro animo De muy valeroso y esforgado capitan y no 
come lo escrive el coronista gomora, pues para hazer aquella 
enbaxada acordamos q fuese el capitan pedro de alvarado en 
vn nauio muy bueno q se dezia san Sebastian y fue ansi acor- 
dado por dos cosas lo vno porque el joan de grijalba ni los 
demas capitanes no estaban bien con el por la entrada q hi- 
zo con su nauio en el rrio de papalote que entouQes le pusi- 
mos por nonbre rrio de aluarado, y lo otro porque avia be- 
' nydo a aquel viaje de mala gana y medio doliente y tanbien 
se con§erto q lleuase todo El oro que se auia rrescatado y rro- 
pa de mantas y los dolientes y los capitanes escriuieron al 
diego Velasqz cada vno lo que les pare8§io, y luego se hizo a 
la uela, y fue la buelta de la ysla de cuba, a donde lo dexare 
agora, asi al pedro de aluarado y a su uiaje, y dire como El 
diego Velasqz enuio en nra busca — 



CAPITDLO XIIIII— como diego Velasqz 
governador de cuba, enuio vn nauio en nra 
busca, y lo que mas le subgedio- — 




ESPUES que salimos con el armada con el capitan 
joan de grijalba, de la ysla.de cuba para hazer nro 
uiaje, sienpre.El diego Velasqz estaua pensatiuo 
no ouiese acaEsgido algun desastre, y deseaba saber de nos- 
otros, y a esta cavsa enbio vn nauio pequeno En nra busca y 
con giertos soldados y por capitan del los a vn xpvl de oli, 
persona de valia y muy esforgado y este es El que fue maes- 
tre de canpo quando lo de Cortes, y mando El diego Velasqz 
q siguiese la derrota de fran®^ hernandez de cordoua, hasta to- 
par con nosotros y El xpvl de oli yendo su viaje en nra bus- 



44 

ca estando surto gerca de tierra en lo de yucatan le dio vn 
rregio tenporal.y por no anegarse sobre las amarras, y el pi- 
loto q traya mando cortar los cables y perdio las anclas, y se 
boluio a Santiago de cuba, donde estaua El diego Velasqz y 
desque uio q no tenia nuevas de nosotros, si pensatiuo estaua 
antes q Enbiase a xpvl de oli muy malo estubo despues q lo 
uio boluer sin rrecaudo y En esta sazon llego El capitan pe- 
dro de alvarado a cuba con el oro y rropa E dolientes y con 
entera rrelagion de lo que auiamos descubierto, y desque El 
govemador vio El oro q Uevaua El capitan pedro de alvara- 
do, q estaua en joyas pares§ia mucho mas de lo q hera y es- 
tauan con el diego velasqz acompanandole muchos vezinos 
de la uilla y de otras partes q venian a negogios, y desq los 
ofi§iales del rrey tomaron El rreal quinto de lo q venia a su 
mg estauan todos espantados de quan rricas tierras auiamos 
descubierto, porq El piru no se descubrio de ay a veynte afios 
y como El pedro de alvarado se lo sabia muy bien platicar, 
disque no hazia El diego velasqz sino abrasalle y en ocho 
dias tener gran rregogijo y jugar canas y si muchafamate- 
nian antes de rricas tierras agora con este oro se sublimo mu- 
cho mas, en todas las yslas y en castilla, como adelante dire 
y dexare al diego Velasqz ha§iendo fiestas, y bolvere a nros 
nauios, que estauamos En san joan de vlua y alii acordamos 
que fuesemos descubriendo mas la costa, lo qual dire ade- 
lante. 



45 



CAPITULO XVI como fuimos descubriendo 
la costa adelante hasta la prouin^ia de 
panuco, y lo que pasamos hasta bolver a 
Cuba 




ESPUES que de nosotros se partio El capitan pedro 
de aluarado para yr a la ysla de cuba, como me- 
morado tengo, acordo nro general con los demas 
capitanes y soldados y pare§er de los pilotos, que fuesemos 
costeando y descubriendo todo lo que pudiesemos por la cos- 
ta y yendo por nra nauegagion, uimos las sierras que se di- 
zen de tuztla, y mas adelante, de ay a otros dos dias, vimos 
otras sierras muy mas altas, que agora se llaman las sierras 
de tuzpa porque se nonbra vn pueblo questa junto aquellas 
sierras tuspa, y yendo nra derrota uimos muchas poblazo- 
nes, y estarian la tierra adentro al pares§er dos o tres leguas, 
y esto es En la prouingia de panuco. E yendo por nra nave- 
gaQion llegamos a vn rrio grande y muy corriente, q le posi- 
mos nonbre rrio de canoas y enfrente de la boca del surgimos, 
y estando surtos todos tres nauios estabamos algo descuyda- 
dos, vinieron de rrepente por el rrio abaxo obra de veynte 
canoas muy grandes Uenas de yndios de guerra con arcos y 
fleehas y langas y vanse derechos al nauio q les paresgio El 
mas chico del qual hera capitan fran?* de montejo y estaua 
mas llegado a tierra y danle vna rrosiada de flecha, q le hi- 
rieron §inco soldados y Echavan sogas al nauio, pensando de 
lo Uevar y avn cortaron vna amarra con sus hachas de cobra 
y puesto q El capitan y los soldados peleavan bien y les tras- 
tornaron tres canoas, nosotros con gran presteza les ayuda- 
mos con nros bateles y escopetas, y ballestas, y herimos mas 
de la tercia parte de aquella gente, por manera q bolvieron 

Bernol Diaz del Castillo.— 7. 



46 

con sus canoas con la mala ventura por donde auian venido, 
y luego al§amos anclas, y Dimos velas, y siguimos costa a 
costa hasta q llegamos a vna punta muy grande y hera tan 
mala de doblar y las corrientes muchas q no podimos yr ade- 
lante y El piloto ant- de alaminos dixo al general q no hera 
bien nauegar mas aquella derrota, y para Ello dio muchas 
causas, y luego se tomo consejo sobre lo q se aula de hazer y 
fue acordado que diesemos la buelta a la ysla de cuba, lo vno 
proq ya entraua El ynuierno y no aula bastimentos, y El vn 
nauio hazia mucha agua y los capitanes desconforraes, porq 
El joan de grijalba dezia que queria poblar, y El alonzo da- 
uila y El fran?* de montejo dezian que no, q no se podrian 
sustentar por causa de los muchos guerreros q En la tierra 
. aula y tanbien todos nosotros los soldados, estauamos muy 
. trabajados de andar por la mar y por estas causas dimos buel- 
ta a dos velas, y las corrientes q nos ayudavan en pocos dias 
llegamos al paraje de el gran rrio de guagacalco y no pudi- 
mos Entrar en el, por ser el tienpo con trario y muy abra^a- 
dos con tierra Entramos en el rrio de tonala q se puso non- 
bre^ Entonges san anton, y alii dimos carenaalvn nauio q 
hazia mucha agua, puesto q toco al entrar en la barra q es 
muy baja y estando aderegando nro nauio vinieron muchos 
yndios del pueblo de tonala, questa vna legua de alii y muy 
de paz e truxeron pan de maiz, y pescado, y fruta, y con bue- 
na voluntad nos lo dieron, y el capitan les hizo muchos ha- 
lagos y les mando dar quentas verdes y diamantes y les dixo 
por senas que truxesen oro a rrescatar y que les daria de nro 
rrescate, y trayan joy as de oro baxo, y les dauan quentas por 
Ello y tanbien vinieron los de gua§acalco y de otros pueblos 
comarcanos y truxeron sus joyezuelas, que todo hera nona- 
da pues demas de aqueste rrescate trayan comunmente todos 
los mas yndios de aquellas provingias, vnas hachas de cobre 
muy luzias como por gentileza y a manera de galania, con 
vnos cabos de palos pintados, y nosotros creymos que heran 
de oro baxo: y comengamos a rrescatar dellas, digo que en 
tres dias se ovieron mas de seiscientas, y estavamos muy con- 
ten tos creyendo que heran de oro bajo, y los yndios mucho 



47 

mas con las quentas, y todo salio vano, que las hachas heran 
de cobre puro y las quentas vn poco de nada: y vn marinero 
avia rrescatado siete hachas, y estava alegre con ellas, tan- 
bien me acuerdo que vn soldado que se dezia bartolome par- 
do, fue a vna casa de ydolos que estava en vn serro, que ya 
e dicho que se dizen cues, que es como quien dize casa de sus 
dioses y en aquella casa hallo muchos ydolos y copal, que es 
como rre^ina con que sahuman, y cuchillos de pedernal con 
que sacrificaban y rretajaban, y en vna area de madera ha- 
llo muchas pie§as de oro que heran diademas y collares, y 
dos ydolos, y otras como quentas vaziadizas, y el oro tomo el 
soldado para si y los otros ydolos y sacrifigios truxo al capi- 
tan, y no falto quien lo uio y lo dixo al grijalba, y queriaselo 
tomar, y rrogamos que se lo dexase y como hera de buena 
condigion, mando que sacado El Real quinto, lo demas fuese 
para el pobre soldado y valdria obra de giento y ginquenta 
pesos, tanbien quiero dezir^ como quedaron los yndios de 
aquella prouingia muy contentos, y luego nos Enbarcamos y 
uamos la buelta de cuba y en quarenta y ginco dias, vnas ve- 
ges con buen tienpo y otras con contrario, llegamos, a San- 
tiago de cuba, donde estaua El diego Velasquez, y El nos 
hizo buen recibimyento y desq vio El oro q trayamos, que 
serian quatro mill pesos y lo que truxo primero pedro de 
alvarado, seria por todo veynte mill otros dezi^ que heran 
mas, y los ofigiales de su mag sacaron El rreal qij^nto y tan- 
bien truxeron las seys gientas hachas, q creymos q heran de 
oro bajo, y quando las vieron estauan tan mohozas, y en fin 
como cobre q hera, y alii ouo bien q rreyr y dezir de la bur- 



1 En el original aparece tacbado lo siguiente: ''como yo senbre vnas pepitas 
de naranja junto a otra casa de ydolos y fue desta manera q como auia mu- 
chos mosquitos en aquel rrio fuemonos diez soldados a dormir en vna casa alta 
de ydolos y junto aquella casa las senbre que auia traydo de cuba porq hera 
fama q veniamos a poblar y na^ieron muy bien porq los papas de aquellos ydo- 
los las benefigiauan y rregavan y linpiavan desq vieron q beran plantas diferen- 
tea de las suyas, de alii se bicieron de naranjas toda aquella prouinyia bien se 
que diran q no bazen al proposito de mi rrela^ion estos quentos viejos y dexa- 
UosE." 



48 

la, y del rrescate y El gouernador estaua muy alegre, puesto 
q paresgio q no estaua bien con el pariente grijalba, y no te- 
nia rrazon, sino q El fran®^ de montejo y El pedro de alva- 
rado que no estaban bien con el grijalba, y tanbien El alonso 
dauila ayudo de mala, y quando esto paso, ya auia otras pla- 
ticas para enbiar otra armada y sobre quien yligirian por ca- 
pitan y dexemos esto aparte y dire como diego Velasquez 
Enbio a espana para que su mg le diese ligengia para rres- 
catar, y conquistar, y poblar y rrepartir las tierras q ouiese 
descubierto. 



CAPITULO XVI [XVIl]-como diego Ve- 
lasqz enbio a espana para q su mg le die- 
se liqengia para rrescatar y conquistar y 
poblar y rrepartir la tierra Desq estuuiese 
de paz — 




! UNQ les paresca a los letores q va fuera de nra rre- 
la^ion esto q yo traygo aqui a la memoria, antes 
que Entre en lo del valeroso y esfor5ado capitan 
Cortes, conviene q se diga por las cavsas q adelante veran y 
tanbien porq en vn tienpo acaesen dos y tres cosas y por fuer- 
5a Emos de hablar En la q mas viene al proposito y El caso 
es, q como ya E declarado quando llego El capitan pedro de 
aluarado a Santiago de cuba con El oro q vuimos De las tie- 
rras q descubrimos, y El diego Velasqz temio que primero q 
el hiziese rrelagion dello a su mg q algun cauallero priuado 
En corte le hurtaria la bendi§ion, y la pediria a su mg y a 
esta cavsa enbio vn su capellan, q se dezia benito martin, 
honbre de nego§ios a castilla, con prouangas y cartas para 
don joan rrodriguez de fonseca obispo de burgos y argobispo 



49 

de rrosano q ansi se nonbraua, y para El li5en9iado Luis §a- 
pata y para El secretario Lope de eonchillos que En aquella 
sazon Entendian En las cosas de yndias, y el diego Velasqz 
les era gran seruidor, En especial del mesmo obispo, y les 
dio pueblos de yndios en la mesma ysla de cuba, que les sa- 
caban oro de las minas y hazian mucho por las cosas del die- 
go Velasqz, y en aquella sazon estaua su mg en flandes, y avn 
les Enbio aquellos caballeros, por mi memorados, joy as de 
oro de las q auiamos rrescatado, y no se hazia otra cosa en 
el rreal consejo de yndias, sino lo q aquellos sefiores manda- 
uan, y lo que enbiaua a negogiar El Velasqz hera que le 
diesen ligen^ia para rrescatar y conquistar y poblar. En to- 
do lo q auia descubierto, y en lo q mas descubriese y dezia 
en sus rrelagiones y cartas que auia gastado muchos milles 
de pesos de oro En el descubrimiento y El benito martin q 
Enbio fue a castilla y nego§io todo lo q pidio, y avn mas 
cumplidamente porq truxo provision para q El diego Velas- 
qz fuese adelantado de cuba pues ya negogiado lo aqui por 
mi ya dho, no uinieron tan presto los despachos, q no salie- 
se primero el valeroso cortes con otra armada y quedarse a 
aqui ansi los despachos, del benito martin como el armada 
del capitan cortes, y dire como estando escriviendo esta rre- 
la§ion, vi las coronicas de los coronistas fran?^ lopez de go- 
moray las del dotor yllescas y las del jouio que hablan En 
las conquistas de la nueva espafia, y lo que sobre Ello me 
pares§iere declarar, adonde ouiere contradigion, y lo propome 
clara y verdaderamente, y va muy diferente de lo q an escri- 
to los coronistas ya por mi nonbrados. 



Bernal Diaz del CastUlo.— 8. 



50 



CAPITULO XYII [XVIII] de los borrones 
y cosas q escriuen los coronistas gomora 
E yllescas aijerca de las cosas de la nueva. 
espaiia — 




^ STANDO escriuiendo En esta mi coronica acaso ui 
lo que escriuen gomora E yllescas y jouio en las 
conquistas de mexico y nueua espana, y desq las 
ley y entendi, y ui de su poligia y estas mis palabras tan gro- 
seras y sin primor dexe de escreuir En ella y estando pre- 
sentes tan buenas ystorias, y con este pensamiento torne a 
leer y a mirar muy bien las platicas y rrazones que dizen En 
sus ystorias y desde el prin^ipio y medio ni cabo no hablan 
lo que paso En la nueva espana, y desque Entraron a dezir 
de las grandes §ibdades y tantos numeros q dizen q avia de 
vezinos en ellas que tanto se les da poner ochenta mill como 
ocho mill, pues de aquellas matansas q dizen q haziamos, 
siendo nosotros quatro §ientos y cinq** soldados, los q anda- 
uamos en la guerra, harto teniamos q defendernos no nos ma- 
tasen v nos llevasen de venQida, q avnq estuuieran los yndios 
atados, no hizieramos tantas muertes, En especial que tenian 
sus armas de algodon q les cubrian El cuerpo, y arcos, saetas, 
rrodelas, lan§as grandes, espadas de navajas, como de a dos 
manos q cortan mas q nras espadas, y muy denodados gue- 
rreros, y escriven los coronistas, por mi memorados, q hazia- 
' mos tantas muertes y crueldades, q -atalarico^ muy brabosi- 
• simo rrey y atila muy soberbio guerrero segun dizen, y se 
cuentan de sus ystorias, en los canpos catalanes no hizieron 
tantas muertes de honbres pues tornando a nra platica, di- 
zen que derrocamos y abrasamos muchas gibdades y tenplos, 
q son Cues y En aquello les pares§e q aplazen mucho a los 



51 

oyentes que leen sus ystorias y no lo uieron ni entendieron 
quando lo escriuian, q los verdaderos conquistadores y cu- 
riosos letores q saben lo q paso claramente les diran q si to- 
do lo que escriven de otras ystorias va como lo de la nueua es- 
pana, yra todo herrado, y lo bueno es que En^algan a vnos 
capitanes y abaxan a otros y los que no se hallaron en las con- 
quistas dizen q fueron En ellas y tanbien dizen muchas cor 
sas y de tal calidad, y por ser tantas y En todo no a^iertan 
no lo declarare, pues otra cosa peor dizen, q cortes mando 
secretamente barrenar los nauios, no es ansi, porq por con- 
sejo de todos los mas soldados y mio mando dar con Ellos al 
travez, a ojos vistos, para q nos ayudasen la gente de la mar 
q En Ellos estauan, a velar y a guerrear y En todo escriven 
may vigioso y para que yo meto tanto la pluma en contar 
cada cosa por si, q es gastar papel y tinta, yo lo mal digo, 
puesto q [no] lleue buen estilo. Dexemos esta platica y bol- 
vere a mi materia q despues de Men mirado todo lo que aqui 
E dho, que es todo burla lo q escriuen a§erca De lo acaEs§i- 
' do En la nueva espafia tome a proseguir mi rrela§ion, por- 
,que la verdadera puli§ia e agraciado conponer es dezir ver- 
•dad En lo que e Escripto, y mirando esto acorde de seguir 
mi yntento con el ornato y platicas q veran para q saiga a luz 
y hallaran las conquistas de la nueva espafia claramente co- 
mo se an de ver quiero bolver con la pluma En la mano como 
El buen piloto Ueua la sonda descubriendo bajos por la mar 
adelante, quando siente q los ay, asi hare yo En dezir los bo- 
rrones de los coronistas, mas no sera todo porque si parte por 
parte se obiesen de escreuir seria mas la costa de rrecojer la 
rrebusca, q En las verdaderas vendimias digo q sobre esta 
mi rrela§ion pueden los coronistas sublimar y dar loa al va- 
leroso y esforgado capitan cortes y a los fuertes conquistado- 
res, pues tan grande Enpresa salio de nras manos, y lo q so- 
bre Ello escrivieren diremos los q En aquellos tienpos nos 
hallamos como testigos de vista ser verdad, como agora dezi- 
mos las contrariedades del, q como tienen tanto atrevimyen- 
to y osadia descreuir tan ui§ioso y sin verdad, pues q sabe- 
mos q la verdad es cosa bendita y sagrada, y q todo lo q con- 



52 

tra Ello dixeren va maldito mas bien se pare§e q El gomora 
fue afigionado a hablar tan loablemente del baleroso cortes, 
y tenemos por §ierto, que le vntaron las manos, pues q a su 
hijo el marqz que agora es le Eligio su coronica, teniendo a 
nro rrey y sefior q con dr^ se le aula de Elegir y Encomen- 
dar y auian de mandar borrar los sefiores del rreal consejo 
de yndias, los borrones q en sus libros van escriptos. — 



CAPITULO XVIII [XIX] como venimos 
cOn otra armada a las tierras nueuas Des- 
cubiertas y por capitan de la armada El 
valeroso y eforgado don hernando cortes, 
que despues del tienpo andando, fue mar- 
quez del valle, y de las contraridades que 
tuvo para le estoruar que no fuese capi- 
tan — 



rOtsi-S^l'' SPUES q llego a cuba El capitan joan de grijalba, 
ya por mi memorado, y visto El governador diego 
Velasques, que heran las tierras rricas, ordeno de 
enbiar vna buena armada, muy mayor que las de antes, y 
para Ello tenia ya a punto diez nauios en el puerto de San- 
tiago de cuba, donde el diego Velasquez rresidia, los quatro 
dellos heran en los que boluimos con el joan de grijalba por- 
que luego les hizo dar carena, y los otros seis rrecogieron de 
toda la ysla, y los hizo proveher de bastimento, que hera pan 
ca§abi, y to§inos, porque en aquella sazon no auia en la ysla 
de cuba ganado vacuno, ni carneros porque hera nuebamen- 
te poblada, y este bastimento no hera mas que pa hasta lie- 
gar a la hauana, porque alii auiamos de hazer todo El mata- 




58 

lotaje, como lo hezimos y dexemos de hablar En esto y dire 
las diferencias que se vbo para Elegir capitan, para yr aquel 
uiaje vbo muchos debates y contrariedades porque §iertos hi- 
dalgos dezian que viniese por capitan vn vazco porcallo, pa- 
riente del conde de feria, y temiose el diego Velasquez, que 
86 le algaria con la armada, porque hera atreuido, otros de- 
zian que viniese vn agustin bermudez, o vn antonio velasqz 
borrego, o vn bernaldino Velasqz, parientes del governador 
y todos los mas soldados que alii nos hallamos, deziamos que 
boluiese el mesmo joan de grijalba, pues hera buen capitan, 
y no aula falta en su persona y su saber mandar andando las 
cosas y con§iertos desta manera, que aqui E dho, dos grandes 
priuados del diego Velasqz, que se dezian andres de duero se- 
cretario del mesmo governador, E vn amador de lares, conta- 
dor de su mg hizieron secretamente conpania con vn hidalgo 
que se dezia hernando cortez natural de medellin, que tenia 
yndios de Encomienda, En aquella ysla, E poco tienpo aula 
que se aula casado con vna senora q se dezia dona catalina 
Juarez la marcayda, esta senora fue hermana de vn joan Jua- 
rez, que despues que se gano la nueua espana fue vzo de me- 
xico, E a lo que yo Entendi, y otras personas dezian, se caso 
Con Ella por amores, y esto deste -casamiento, muy largo lo 
dezian otras personas que lo uieron y por esta cavsa no toca- 
re mas En esta tecla, y bolvere a dezir a§erca de la conpafiia, 
y fue desta manera que con^ertasen estos priuados del diego 
Velasqz, que le hiziesen dar al hernando cortes la capitania 
. general, de toda la armada y que partirian Entre todos tres 
. la ganan5ia del oro y plata y joyas: de la parte que le cupiese 
. a coii^es, porque secretamente. El diego Velasqz enbiaba a 
• rrescatar y no a poblar, segun despues pares9io por las yns- 
tru§iones que dello dio, y avnque publicaua y pregono, que 
' enbiava a poblar, pues hecho este consierto, tienen tales mo- 
dos el duero y El contador con el diego Velasqz E le dizen 
tan buenas y meliosas palabras, E loando mucho a cortes, 
ques persona En quien cabe El cargo para ser capitan, porq 
demas de ser muy esfor§ado, sobre mandar y ser temido, y 
que le seria muy fiel En todo lo que le encomendase, ansi 



54 

en lo de la armada, como en lo demas y demas desto hera su 
ahijado, y fue su padrino quando cortes se velo con la dona 
catalina suarez, por manera que le persuadieron y convoca- 
ron a Ello, y luego se Eligio por capitan general y El secre- 
tario andres de duero hizo las provijiones como zuele dezi- 
ros el rrefran de muy buena tinta y como cortes las quiso, 
muy bastantes, ya publicada su Elecgion, a vnaa personas les 
"plazia y a otras les pesaua y vn domingo yendo a misa El 
.diego Velasqz, como hera governador, yvanle aconpafiando 
los mas nobles vezinos que aula En aquella uilla, y Ueuaua 
al hernando cortes a su lado derecho por le honrrar, E yba 
delante del diego Velasqz vn truhan, que se dezia gervantes 
El loco haziendo gestos y chocarrerias y dezia a la gala, a la 
gala de mi amo diego, o diego, o diego, que capitan as Ele- 
gido, que es de medellin destremadura, capitan de gran Ven- 
tura, mas temo diego no se te al§e con el armada porque todos 
le juzgan por muy varon En sus cosas, y dezia otras locuras, 
que todas yban ynclinadas a mali§ia, y porque lo yua dizien- 
do de aquella manera le dio de pesco§asos. El andres de due- 
ro que yua alii junto al diego Velasqz, y le dixo calla borra- 
cho loco, no seas mas vellaco, que bien entendido tenemos, 
que Esas maligias, so color de gra§ias, no salen de ti, y toda- 
uia el loco yva diziendo por mas pesco5asos que le dieron, 
biba biba, la gala de mi amo diego, y del su venturoso capi- 
tan y juro a tal mi amo diego, que por no te ver Uorar El 
mal rrecaudo que agora as hecho, yo me quiero yr con el 
aquellas rricas tierras, tubose por §ierto, que le dieron los 
Velasqz parientes del governador giertos pesos de oro aquel 
chocarrero porque dixese aquellas mali§ias, so color de gra- 
Qias, y todo salio verdad como lo dixo dizen que los locos al- 
gunas veces aQiertan en lo que dizen. y verdaderamente fue 
Elegido hernando cortes, para ensal§ar nra santa fee y seruir 
a su mg como adelante dire antes que mas pase adelante 
quiero dezir como El valeroso y esforgado hernando cortes 
hera hijo-dalgo conos§ido por quatro abolengos. El primero 
de los corteses q ansi se llamaba su padre martin cortes El 
segundo por los pigarros El tergero por los nonrroys El quar- 



55 

to per los altamiranos E puesto que fue tan valeroso y esfor- 
gado y venturoso capitan no le nonbrare de aqui adelante 
ninguno destos sobrenonbres de valeroso, ni esfor§ado, ni 
marqz del valle, sino solamente hernando cortes, porq tan 
tenido y acatado fue En tanta Estima El nonbre de solamen- 
te cortes, ansi En todas las yndias, como En espana, como 
fue nonbrado El nonbre de alejandro En ma§edonia y entre 
los rromanos Julio gesar V ponpeyro, y expion y entre los 
cartagineses anibal y en nra castilla a gon^alo hernandez El 
gran capitan y El mesmo valeroso cortes se holgaua que no le 
pusiesen aquellos sublimados ditados, sino solamente su non- 
bre, y ansi le nonbrare de aqui adelante y dexare de hablar 
En esto y dire En Este otro capitulo las cosas q hizo y en- 
tendio para proseguir su armada — 



CAPITULO XIX [XX] como cortes se aper- 
qibio y Entendio En las cosas q convenian 
para se despachar con el armada — 

pues como ya fue Elegido hernando cortes por general, de la 
manera que dho tengo, comen§o a buscar todo genero de ar- 
mas, ansi Escopetas, polvora y ballestas, y todos quantos per- 
trechos de armas pudo aver y buscar de rrescate, y tanbien 
otras cosas pertenes^ientes aquel biaje, y demas desto se co- 
mengo de pulir y atauiar su persona, mucho mas que de an- 
tes y se puso su penacho de plumas, con su medalla y vna 
cadena de oro, y vna rropa de tergiopelo senbradas por Ella 
vnas lazadas de oro, y en fin como vn braboso y esforgado 
capitan, pues para hazer aquestos gastos que E dho, no tenia 
.de q porque En aquella sazon estaua muy adeudado y pobre, 
puesto que tenia buenos yndios de Encomienda y sacaba oro 
de las minas, mas todo lo gastaua En su persona y En ata- 
uios de su muger, que hera rresien casado y En algunos fo- 
rasteros guespedes que se le allegaban, porque hera de buena 



56 

conuersagion y apasible, y auia sido dos vezes alcalde en la 
uilla de san joan de baracoa, donde hera v^z, porque En 
aquestas tierras se tiene por mucha onrra a quien hazen al- 
calde, y como vnos mercaderes amigos suyos que se dezian 
xayme tria y geronimo tria, E vn pedro de xerez, le uieron 
con aquel cargo de capitan general, le prestaron quatro mill 
pesos de oro y le dieron fiados otros quatro mill En merca- 
durias, sobre sus yndios y hazienda y fiangas, y luego man- 
do hazer dos estandartes y vanderas labrados de oro con las 
armas rreales, E vna cruz de cada parte con vn letrero que 
dezia, hermanos y conpaneros, sigamos la seiial de la santa 
cruz con fe verdadera, que con ella ven^eremos, y luego man- 
do dar pregones y tocar tronpetas y atanbores, Enonbre de 
su mg y en su rreal nonbre diego Velasqz, y El por su capi- 
tan general, para que cualesquier personas q quisiesen yr En 
su conpania a las tierras nuevamente descubiertas, a las con- 
quistar y poblar, les darian sus partes del oro y plata y rri- 
quezas que ouiere, y Encomiendas de yndios, despues de pa- 
gificada, y que para Ello tenia li§en§ia el diego Velasqz de 
su mg E puesto que se pregono aquesto de la Ii9en5ia del rrey 
nro senor avn no auia venido con Ella de castilla El capellan 
benito martin que fue El que diego Velasqz ouo Enbiado pa- 
ra q lo truxese como dho tengo En El capitulo q dello habla 
pues como se supo esta nueva En toda la ysla de cuba, y tan- 
bien cortes escriuio a todas las uillas a sus amigos que se apa- 
rejasen para yr con El aquel viaje, vnos vendian sus hazien- 
das para buscar armas y caballos, otros a hazer pan cagabi y 
to9inos para matalotaje, y colchavan armas de algodon, y se 
aperyebian de lo q auian menester, lo mejor que podian de 
manera que nos jun tamos En Santiago de cuba donde sali- 
mos con el armada, mas de trezientos y cinquenta soldados 
y de la casa del mesmo diego Velasqz salio vn su mayordo- 
mo que se dezia diego de ordaz y este el mismo Velasqz le 
enbio para q mirase y entendiese en larmada no vbiese algu- 
na mala tra§a de cortes, porq sienpre temio del que se al§a- 
ria avnque no lo daua a Entender y uino vn fran?** de morla, 
y vn escobar, que Uamavamos El paje y vn heredia, y joan 



57 

rruano, y pedro escudero, y vn martin ramos de lares, y otros 
muchos, que heran amigos y panyaguados del diego Velas- 
qz, E yo me quiero poner aqui a la postre q tanbien sali de 
la misma casa del diego Velasqz, porq hera mi deudo, y aques- 
tos soldados pongo aqui agora por memoria, porque despues 
En su tienpo y lugar, escriuire de todos los que venimos en 
la armada, y de los que se me acordaren sus nonbres, y de 
que tierra heran de castilla naturales y como cortes andaua 
muy soligito En auiar su armada, y en todo se dava mucha 
•priesa, como la maligia y Enbidia rreynaua En los devdos del 
'Velasquez, estaban afrentados, como no se fiaba El pariente 
* ni hazia quenta dellos, y dio aquel cargo, de capitan, a cor- 
tes, sabiendo que auia sido su gran Enemigo pocos dias auia 
. sobre el casamiento de cortes ya por mi declarado, y a esta 
cavsa andavan murmurando del pariente diego Velasqz y 
avn de cortes, y por todas las uias que podian le rreboluian 
con El diego Velasqz para que En todas maneras le rreboca- 
sen El poder de lo qual tenia auiso El cortes, y no se quitaua 
de estar sienpre En conpania del governador, y mostrandose 
muy gran su seruidor y le dezia que le auia de hazer me- 
diante dios, muy 111- sefior E rrico En poco tienpo y de- 
mas desto El andres de duero auisaua sienpre a cortes, que 
se diese priesa En se enbarcar El y sus soldados, porque ya 
le tenian trastrocado al diego Velasqz con ynportunidades 
de aquellos sus parientes los Velasqz, y desque aquello vio, 
cortes, mando a su muger que todo lo que ouiese de llevar 
de bastimentos y rregalos que zuelen hazer [las mujeres] pa- 
ra tan largo viaje para sus maridps, se los enbiase luego a en- 
barcar a los nauios E ya tenia mandado pregonar E aper§e- 
bido a los maestres y pilotos y a todos los soldados, que Entre 
aquel dia y la noche se fuesen a Enbarcar, que no quedase 
ninguno En tierra y desque los uio todos enbarcados se fue 
a despedir del diego Velasqz, aconpafiado de aquellos sus 
grandes amigos y de otros muchos hidalgos, y todos los mas 
nobles vezinos de aquella villa, y despues de muchos ofreyi- 
mientos y abragos de cortes al governador y del governador 
a el, se despidio, y otro dia muy de manana despues de aver 

Bemal Dlas del CastUlo.— 9. 



58 

oydo misa, nos fuemos a los nauios, y el mismo diego Ve- 
lasqz fue alii con nosotros, E se tornaron abra§ar, y con mu- 
chos cumplimyentos del vno al otro y nos hezimos a la ue- 
la, y con prospero tienpo Uegamos al puerto de la trinidad 
y tornado puerto y saltados En tierra, nos salieron a recibir 
todos los mas vezinos de aquella villa, y nos festejaron mu- 
cho E aqui En esta rrela^ion veran las contrariedades q tu- 
bo cortes, y las palabras q dize gomora En su ystoria, como 
son todas contrarias de lo que paso. — 



C APITULO XX [XXI] De lo que cortes hi- 
zo desque Uego a la uilla de la trinidad j 
de los soldados que de aquella villa salie- 
ron para yr En nra conpania y de lo que 
mas le auino — 

luego llevaron los mas prin§ipales de aquella villa aposen- 
tar a cortes y a todos nosotros, Entre los vezinos, y en las casas 
del capitan joan de grijalba poso cortes y luego mando cortes 
poner su estandarte y pendon rreal delante de su posada, y 
dar pregones, como se aula hecho En Santiago, y mando bus- 
car todo genero de armas y conprar otras cosas ne9esarias, y 
bastimentos, y de aquella uilla salieron 9inco hermanos, que 
se dezian pedro de alvarado y jorge de alvarado y gon§alo y 
gomez y joan dalvarado el viejo bastardo El capitan pedro 
de alvarado es el por mi otras vejes ya memorado, y tanbien 
salio de aquesta uilla alonso de auila, capitan que fue cuan- 
do lo de grijalba, y joan descalante, y pero sanchez farfan, y 
gon§alo*mexia que despues El tienpo andando, fue tesorero 
En mexico y vn vaena E joanes de fuenterrabia, y lares El 
buen ginete, Uamamoslo ansi porque vbo otro lares, y xpvl. 
de oli El muy esforgado, que fue maestro de canpo en las 
guerras mexicanas, y ortiz el musico y vn gaspar sanchez, so- 



59 

brino del tesorero de cuba y vn diego de pineda o pinedo y 
vn alonzo rrodriguez, que tenia vnas minas rricas de oro y vn 
bartolome gr^ y otros hidalgos que no me acuerdo sus non- 
bres, y todas personas de mucha valia y desde la trinidad es- 
criuio cortes a la uilla de santispiritus, que estaua de alii diez 
y ocho leguas, ha9iendo saber a todos los vezinos como yva 
aquel viaje a seruir a su mg y con palabras sabrosas y ofre- 
{imientos para traer asi muchas personas de calidad, que es- 
tavan en aquella villa poblados q se dezian alonso hernandez 
puerto carrero primo del conde de medellin y gon5alo de san- 
doval, q despues El tienpo andando fue en mexico alguazil 
mayor y avn ocho meses fue gouernador de la nueva espafia, 
y vino joan Velasqz de leon y pariente de diego Velasqz, y 
rrodrigo rreogel y gon§alo lopez de ximena y vn su herma- 
noy vn joan §edeno este joan cedeno hera vezino de aquella 
uilla, y declarolo ansi porq hauia en nra armada otros dos 
joan cendenos y todos estos que E nonbrado heran personas 
muy generosas, y luego vinieron desde la villa de santispiri- 
tus a la trinidad, donde estaua cortes, y como supo que ve- 
nian, los salio a rreQibir con todos nosotros, que estauamos 
en su conpania y les mostro mucho amor, y Ellos le tenian 
grande acato y estos vezinos que E nonbrado, tenian sus es- 
tan9ias de pan ca9abi y manadas de puercos, 9erca de aque- 
lla uilla y cada vno procuro de poner el mas bastimiento que 
pudo. pues estando questauamos desta manera, rrecogendo 
soldados y conprando caballos, q En aquella sazon pocos aula 
y muy caros y como aquel cavallero por mi nonbrado, que 
se dezia alonso hernandez puerto carrero, no tenia caballo ni 
de que conprallo, hernando cortes le conpro vna yegua rru- 
sia, y dio por Ella vnas lazadas de oro que traya en la rropa 
de ter9iopelo, la qual mando hazer En Santiago de cuba co- 
mo dho tengo, y En aquel ynstante vino vn navio de la ha- 
uana aquel puerto, que traya vn joan 9edeno vzo de la mis- 
ma havana, cargado de pan ca9abi y to9inos q yua a vender 
a vnas minas de oro q estauan 9erca de Santiago de cuba y 
como sal to En tierra el joan cedeno fue a hazer acato a cor- 
tes, y despues de muchas platicas q tubieron, le conpro El na- 



60 

vio y toginos y ca^abe fiado y se fue con nosotros, ya tenia- 
mos onze nauios, y todo se nos hazia prosperamente, gragias 
a dios por Ello, y estando de la manera que E dho Enbio 
diego Velasqz cartas y mandamientos para q le detengan El 
armada a cortes, y le enbien preso lo qual veran adelante lo 
que paso 



CAPITULO XXI [XXII] como El gover- 
nador diego Velasquez Enbio En posta dos 
criados a la villa de la trinidad, con pode- 
res y mandamientos para rrebocar a cortes 
el poder y no dexar pasar el armada, y lo 
prendiesen y le enbiasen a Santiago — 

quiero bolber algo atras de nra platica para dezir como des- 
pues q salimos de Santiago de cuba, con todos los nauios, de 
la manera que E dho, dixeron al diego Velasqz tales palabras 
contra cortes, q le hizieron bolver la hoja porq le acusavan 
q yba al§ado y que salio del puerto a geuQerros tapados y q 
le auian oydo dezir q aunq pesare al diego Velasqz y a sus pa- 
rientes q auia de ser capitan, y que para este Efecto auia En- 
barcado todos sus soldados en los nauios de noche, para si le 
quisiesen detener por fuer§a hazerse a la vela, y q le auian 
engafiado al Velasqz su secretario andres de duero y El con- 
tador amador de lares, por tratos q auia Entre ellos y cortes, 
y quien mas metia la mano en ello para convocar al diego 
Velasqz que rrebocase luego El poder heran sus parientes 
los Velasqz y vn uiejo que se dezia joan millan, q le llama- 
ban el estrologo, otros dezian q tenia rramo de locura porq 
hera atronado, y este viejo dezia muchas ve§es al diego Ve- 
lasqz mira sefior que cortes se vengara agora De vos de quan- 
do le tuuistes preso y como es mafioso y atreuido os a de echar 
a perder si no lo rremedias presto, a estas palabras y otras 



61 

muchas q le dezian dio oydos a Ellas, y El que sienpre es- 
taua con aquella sospecha y con mucha brebedad enbio dos 
mogos despuelas de quien se fiaua, con mandamyentos y pro- 
visiones para El alcalde mayor de la trinidad, q se dezia 
fran?^ verdugo, El qual hera cufiado del mismo govemador 
y escriuio cartas a otros sus amigos y parientes para q En to- 
do caso no dexasen pasar El armada, porque dezia en los 
' mandamientos que le detuuiesen o que le llevasen preso, por- 
que ya no hera capitan, y le auian rrebocado El poder y da- 
.do a vasco porcallo, y tanbien Enbio otras cartas para diego 
de ordas, y fran?® de morla y otros sus criados rrogandoles 
mucho que no pasase el armada, y como cortes lo supo hablo 
al ordaz y al fran?® verdugo y a todos los soldados y vezinos 
de la trinidad, que le paresgio q le serian contrarios y En 
favores§er las proui§iones, y tales palabras y ofrescimyentos 
1^ dixo, que les truxo a su seruigio y avn el mysmo diego 
de ordas conuoco luego a fran?^ verdugo, q hera alcalde ma- 
yor, q no se hablase mas en el neg09io sino q lo disgimulase 
y pusole por delante, q hasta alii no auian visto ninguna no- 
uedad En cortes, antes se mostraua muy seruidor del gouer- 
nador y ya que en algo se quisiesen poner para quitalle El 
armada, que cortes tenia muchos caballeros por amigos y es- 
taban mal con el diego Velasqz, porq no les dio buenos yn- 
dios y demas desto, tiene gran copia de soldados, y estaba 
muy pujante y que seria meter §isana en la uilla, o q por 
Ventura los soldados les darian sacomano, y la rrobarian v 
harian otros peores descongiertos y ansi se quedo, sin hazer 
bulligio, y El vn mo^o despuelas, de los que trayan las car- 
tas, se fue^on nosotros, q se dezia pedro lago de la vega, y 
con el otro mensajero escriuio cortes muy amorosamente al 
diego velasqz, que se marauillava de su mer9ed de aver to- 
mado aquel acuerdo y que su deseo es seruir a dios, y a su 
.mg y a el En su rreal nonbre y que le suplica, que no oyese 
mas aquellos senores sus devdos ni por vn viejo loco como 
hera joan millan se hiziese mudanga y tanbien escriuio a to- 
dos sus amigos y a duero, y al contador sus conpaneros y 
luego mando Entender a todos los soldados En adere§ar ar- 



62 

mas y a dos herreros q estaban En aquella villa, q hiziesen 
casquillos, y a los ballesteros q desbastasen almasen, y hizie- 
sen saetas y atrajo y convoco a los dos herreros, que se fue- 
sen con nosotros y ansi lo hizieron y Estuuimos En aquella 
villa diez dias donde lo dexare y dire como nos enbarcamos 
para yr a la hauana, tanbien quiero que vean los q aquesto 
leyeren, la diferengia que ay de la rrela9ion de gomora quan- 
do dize que enbio a mandar diego Velasqz a ordaz, q conui- 
dase a comer a cortes en el nauio y lo Ueuase preso a Santia- 
go, y pone otras cosas de tranpas En su coronica q por no me 
alargar lo dejo al pare§er de los curiosos letores boluamos a 
nra materia— 



[CAPITULOJ XXII [XXIII] como El capi- 
tan hernando cortes se enbarco con todos 
los soldados para yr por la vanda del sur 
a la hauana, y enbio otro nauio por la van- 
da del norte, y lo que mas le aconte^io 




p 



ESPUES que cortes uio q en la villa de la trinidad 
no teniamos En q Entender aper§ibio a todos los 
soldados, q alii se auian juntado para yr en su con- 

pania de alvarado que se fuese por tierra de||^e aquella 

villa de la trinidad hasta la hauana ^ rrecoxiese vnos sol- 
dados que estaban en vnas estangias y yo fui en su conpania 



1 En la edici6n hecha porBem6n, se lee: '*apercibi6 A todos los Caualleros, 
y soldados que alii se auian juntado para ir en su compania, que se embarca- 
ssen juntamente con 6\ en los nauios que estauan en el Puerto de la vanda del 
Sur, y los que por tierra quisiessen ir, fuessen hasta la Hauana con Pedro de 
Alvarado, para que fuesse recogiendo mas soldados, que estauan en vnas estan- 
dafi." Fol. 15fte. 



63 

tanbien mando cortes a vn hidalgo q se dezia joan descalan- 
te muy su amigo que fuese En vn navio por la vanda del 
norte y mando que todos los caballos fuesen por tierra pueg 
ya despachado todo lo q dho tengo, cortes se Enbarco En la 
nao capitana con todos los navios para yr a la derrota de 
la havana parege ser que las naos que llevava En conserva 
no vieron a la capitana, donde y va cortes, porq Era de noche, 
y fueron al puerto, y ansi mismo Uegamos por tierra con pe- 
dro de alvarado a la villa de la Avana, En el navio que ve- 
nia joan de Escalante por la banda del norte y tanbien avian 
venido todos los caballos que yban por trra y cortes no vino 
ni sabian dar rrazon del y pasaronse ginco dias y no avia nue- 
vas ningunas de su navio y teniamos sospecha no se oviese 
perdido En los jardines, qs 5erca de las yslas de pinos don- 
de hay muchos bajos, q son diez o doze leguas de la Avana 
y fue acordado por todos nosotros que fuesen tres navios de 
los de menor porte En su busca de cortes y En adere9ar los 
navios y En debates, vaya hulano vaya yutano o p^ o san- 
cho, se pasaron otros dos dias y cortes no venia ya Abia En- 
tre nosotros vandos y medio chirinolas, sobre quien seria ca- 
pitan hasta saber de cortes y quien mas En ello metio la 
mano fue diego de ordas, como mayordomo mayor del Ve- 
lasquez, a quien Enbiaba para Entender solamente En lo de 
la armada no se algasen con ella, dexemos esto y bolbamos 
A cortes que como venia En el navio de mayor porte coino 
antes tengo dho En el paraje de ysla de pinos o ^erca de los 
jardines ay muchos bajos, paresge ser toco y quedo algo En 
seco el nabio e no pudo nabegar y con el batel mando des- 
cargar toda la carga q se pudo sacar porq alii §erca Avia tie- 
rra donde lo descargaron y desque vieron quel navio Estava 
En floto y podia nadar le metieron en mas hondo y tornaro 
a cargar lo que avian sacado En tierra y dio vela y fue su via- 
je hasta El puerto de la habana y quando llego todos los mas 
de los cavalleros y soldados que le aguardavamos nos alegra- 
mos Con su venida, salvo algunos que pretendian ser capi- 
tanes y Qesaron las chirinolas y despues que le Aposen tamos 
En casa de pedro barba que Era teniente de aquella villa del 



64 

diego Velasquez, mando sacar sus estandartes y ponellos de- 
lante de las casas donde posava, y mando dar pregones, se- 
gun y de la manera de los pdos, y de alii de la Abana vino 
vn hidalgo que se dezia fran§iseo de montejo, y este Es El 
por mi muchas vezes nonbrado, que despues de ganado me- 
xico fue Adelantado y governador de yucatan y vino diego 
de soto El de toro, que fue mayordomo de cortes En lo de 
mexico, y vino vn angulo y gar§icaro y Sebastian rrodriguez 
y vn pacheco y vn hulano gutierres, y vn rrojas no digo rro- 
jas El rrico, y vn mauQebo que se dezia sarita clara, y dos her- 
manos que se dezian los martinez del freginal y vn joan de 
najara, no lo digo por El sordo El del juego'de la pelota de me- 
xico, y todos personas de calida, sin otros soldados, que no 
me Acuerdo sus nonbres, y quando cortes los vio todos aque- 
llos ydalgos juntos, se holgo En gran manera, y luego Enbio 
vn navio a la punta de guaniguanico, a vn pueblo que alii 
estava de yndios, a donde hazian ca§abi y tenian muchos 
puercos, para que cargase El navio de toginos, porque aque- 
11a estan5ia Era del governador diego Velasquez y Enbio por 
capitan del nauio al diego de ordas, como mayordomo de las 
haziendas del Velasquez, y enbiole por tenelle apartado de 
si, porque cortes supo que no se mostro mucho En su fabor 
(juando ovo las contiendas sobre quien seria capitan quando 
cortes estaua En la ysla de pinos que toco su nabio y por no 
tener contraste En su persona le Enbio y le mando q despues 
que tubiese cargado El nauio de bastimentos, se Estuuiese 
aguardando En el mesmo puerto de guaniguanico, hasta q se 
juntase con otro navio q aula de yr por la vanda del norte y 
que yrian anbos En conserba hasta lo de co§umel o le auisa- 
ria con yndios en canoas lo q auia de hazer, bolvamos a de- 
zir del fran?* de montejo y de todos aquellos vezinos de la 
Abana q metieron mucho matalotaje de ca§abi y to9inos, que 
otra cosa no auia, y luego cortes mando sacar toda la artille- 
ria de los nauios, q eran diez tiros de bron§e y §iertos falco- 
netes y dio cargo dello a vn artillero q se dezia mesa y a vn 
levantisco q se dezia arbengo y a vn joan Catalan, para que 
lo linpiasen y provasen y que las pelotas y polvora q todo lo 



65 

tuviesen muy a punto, y dioles vino e binagre con que lo rre- 
finasen y dioles por conpanero a vno que se dezia bartolome 
de Vsagre, asi mismo mando aderegar las vallestas, y cuer- 
das, y nuezes, y almagen, E que tirasen a terrero, y que mi- 
rasen a quantos pasos llegaba la fuga de cada vna dellas, y 
como En aquella tierra de la Abana Auia mucho algodon hi- 
zimos armas muy bien colchadas, pbrq son buenas para En- 
tre yndios, porques mucha la vara y flecha y langadas q davan 
pues piedra Era como granigo, y alii En la Abana comengo 
cortes a poner casa y a tratarse como senor, y el primer mas- 
tresala q tubo fue vn guzman q luego se murio, o mataron 
yndios, no digo por el mayordomo cristoval de guzman q fue 
de cortes q prendio guatemuz quando la guerra de mexico, 
y tanbien tubo cortes por camarero a vn rrodrigo rrangel y 
per mayordomo a vn joan de cageres q fue despues de gana- 
do mexico, honbre rrico y todo esto ordenado nos mando 
apergebir para Enbarcar y que los cavallos fuesen rreparti- 
dos En todos los navios, hizieron un pesebrera y metieron 
mucho mayz E yerva seca^iquiero aqui poner por memoria 
todos los caballos E yeguas que pasaron. 

capitan cortes vn cavallo castaiio zayno, q luego se le mu- 
rio en san ju^ de vlua. 

pedro de alvarado y hernan lopez de avila vna yegua ala- 
zana muy buena, de juego y de carrera, y desque llegamos 
A la nueba espana El p*^ de alvarado le conpro la mitad de 
la yegua o se la tomo por fuer§a. 

Alonso hernandez puerto carrero, vna yegua rruzia de bue- 
na carrera, que le conpro cortes por las lagadas de oro. 

joan Velasquez de leon otra yegua rruyzia muy poderosa, 
q Uamauamos la rrabona, muy rrebuelta y de buena carrera. 

xpoual de oli vn cavallo castaiio Escuro, harto bueno. 

francisco de moritejo y alonso de abila vn cavallo alazan 
tostado no fue bueno para cosa de guerra — 

francisco de morla vn cavallo castaiio Escuro, gran corre- 
dor y rrebuelto 

Jvan descalante, vn cavallo castaiio claro tresalvo, no fue 
bueno. 

Bernal Diaz del CastiUot—lO. 



66 

diego de ordas vna yegua rru^ia machorra pasadera y avn- 
q Corria poco — 

gODQalo dominguez, vn muy estremado ginete, vn cavallo 
castano Escuro muy bueno E gran corredor — 

pedro gongales de truxillo, vn buen cavallo castano, perfe- 
to castano que corria muy bien — 

moron vezino del bayamo, vn cavallo hovero labrado de 
las manos y Era bien rrebuelto — 

baena, vezino de la trinidad, yn cavallo hovero algo sobre 
morzillo no salio bueno para cosa ninguna — 

lares, El muy buen ginete vn cavallo muy bueno, de color 
castano Algo claro e buen corredor. 

ortiz El musico, y vn bartolome garyia, que solia tener 
minas de oro, vn muy buen cavallo oscuro que dezian El ha- 
rriero, Este fue vno de los buenos cavallos, que pasamos, En 
la armada — 

Jvan sedefio, vezino de la Abana, vna yegua castana y es- 
ta yegua pario En el navio. Este joan sedefio paso, El mas 
rrico soldado que ovo En toda la armada porque truxo na- 
vio suyo y la yegua, y vn negro, E ca§abe e tozino porque 
En aquella sazon no se podia hallar caballos ni negros si no 
Era a peso de oro, y a Esta cavsa no pasaron mas caballos, 
porque no los avia ni de que comprallos y dexallo E aqui y 
dire lo que alii nos avino ya questabamos A punto para pa- 
sarnos enbarcar. 



67 



CAPITULO XXIII [XXIV]. Como diego 
Velasquez Enbio a vn su criado, que se de- 
zia gaspar de garnica Con mandamientos 
J provisiones, para que En todo caso se 
prendiese cortes, j se le tomase El arma- 
da, y lo que sobrello se hizo — 




}Y nes§esidad, que algunas Cosas desta rrelagion 
buelyan atras a se rre§itar para que se Entienda 
bien lo que se Escrive, y esto digo que paresge ser 
que El diego Velasquez, vio y supo de §ierto, que franyisco 
verdugo su teniente E cufiado, questava En la villa de la tri- 
nidad, no quiso apremiar a cortes que dexase la armada an- 
tes le faboresgio juntamente con diego de ordas pa q saliese, 
dizquestava tan Enojado el di^ belasqz que hazia bramuras 
y dezia Al secretario andres de duero y al contador Amador 
de lares, que EUos le abian Engafiado por el trato que hizie- 
ron, y que cortes yva Algado, y Acordo de Enbiar a vn su 
criado con cartas y mandamientos para la Abana a su tenien- 
te, que se dezia p^ barba, y escrivio a todos sus parientes ques- 
tavan por vezinos En Aquella villa, y al diego de ordaz y a 
joan Velasquez de leon, que eran sus deudos y amygos, rro- 
gandoles muy afetuosamente, que En bueno ni En malo, no 
dexen pasar Aquella armada, y que luego prendiesen A cor- 
tes y se le Enbiasen preso a buen rrecaudo a Santiago de Cu- 
ba Uegado que Uego garnica, q Asi se dezia El q enbio Con 
las cartas y mandamientos A la Abana se supo lo que traya, 
y con este mismo mensajero tubo Abiso Cortes de lo q enbia- 
ba el Velasquez y fue desta manera q vn fraile de la md que 
Be dava por servidor del Velasquez, questava En su conpania 



68 

del mesmo governador, escrevia A otro fraile de su orden que 
se dezia fray bartolome de olmedo, que yva Con nosotros, y 
En aquella carta del frayle le avisaban A cortes sus dos con- 
paneros andres de duero y el contador, de lo que pasaba, bol- 
vamos a nro Cuento, pues Como el ordas le abia Enbiado 
cortes a lo de los bastimentos, Con el navio, como dho ten- 
go, no tenia cortes en el contraditor sino en el joan Velas- 
quez de leon, luego que le hablo le atraxo a su mandado y 
espe§ialmente, que el ju*^ belasqz no estava bien con el pa- 
riente porq no le abia dado buenos yndios, pues a todos los 
mas que avia Escrito El diego Velasquez ninguno le acudia 
A su proposito, antes todos a vna se mostraron por cortes, y 
El teniente pedro barba muy mejor, y demas desto los Alva- 
rados y el alonso hernandez puerto Carrero y fran- de mon- 
tejo, y xpoual de oli y joan descalante, e andres de mojaraz 
y su hermano gregorio de mojaraz y todos nosotros pusiera- 
- mos la vida por El cortes, por manera que si En la villa de 
' la trinidad, se disimularon los mandamientos, muy mejor se - 
*. callaron Enton^es, y con el mismo garnica Escrivio el tenien- 
te pedro barba Al diego Velasquez, que no oso prender A cor- 
tes, porquestava muy pujante de soldados, E que ovo temor 
no metiesen A saco mano la villa y la rrobasen y Enbarcase 
todos los vezinos y se los llevase consigo, E que a lo que A 
Entendido, que cortes Era su servidor y que no se atrevio 
hazer otra cosa, y cortes lo Escribio al velasquez con pala- 
bras tan buenas y de ofresQimientos que lo sabia muy bien 
' dezir, E que otro dia se aria a la vela y que le seria servidor. 



CAPITULO XXIII [XXV]. Como cortes^se 
hizo A la vela Con toda su conpana de Ca- 
balleros y soldados para la ysla de Co^u- 
mel, y lo que alii le abino. 




10 ezimos alarde hasta la ysla de Cogumel, mas de man- 
dar cortes que los caballos se Enbarcasen y mando 
a pedro de alvarado, q fuese por la banda del norte 
En vn buen navio que se dezia san Sebastian, y mando Al 
piloto que llebaba En el nauio q le aguardase En la punta 
de san anton, para que alii se juntase con todos los nauios 
par yr En conserva hasta cogumel, y Enbio mensajero A die- 
go de ordas que abia ydo por el bastymento que aguardase, 
q hiziese lo mismo, porq estaba En la banda del norte, y en 
diez dias del mes de hebrero, ano de mill E quid's y diez y nue- 
ve alios, despues de aver oydo misa hizi [mos] a la bela Con 
nueve navios por la banda del sur, Con la copia de los caba- 
Ueros y soldados que dho tengo, y con los dos nabios por la 
banda del norte q fueron onze co el q fue pedro de alvarado 
con sesenta soldados E yo fuy En su conpaiiia y el piloto q 
Uevavamos, q se dezia Camacho, no tuvo cuenta de lo que 
le fue mandado por cortes y siguio su derrota y llegamos dos 
dias primero que cortes A cogumel y surgimos En el puerto 
ya por mi otras bezes dho quado lo de grijalba, y cortes avn 
no abia Uegado Con su flota, por cavsa q vn navio en que ve- 
nia por capitan fran§isco de morla, Con [el mal] tienpo se 
le salto El governalle, y fue socorrido con otro governalle de 
los navios que venian con cortes,^ y vinieron todos En con- 

1 Testado en el original: ''y bolvieron por la mar en busca del gobernalle y 
lo hallaron y lo pusieron en su lugar con que luego navego la nao. '' 



70 

serva bolvamos a p^ de alvarado, que asi Como Uegamos Al 
puerto saltamos En tierra En el pueblo de Co5umel, con to- 
dos los soldados, y no hallamos yndios ningu^s q se avian 
ydo huyendo y mando que luego fuesemos A otro pueblo 
questava de alii vna legua y tanbien se amontaron e huye- 
ron los naturales y no pudieron llevar su hazienda y dexaron 
gallinas y otras cosas y de las gallinas mando pedro de alva- 
rado q tomasen hasta quarenta dellas y tanbien en vna casa 
de adoratorios de ydolos, tenian vnos paramentos de mantas 
viejas y vnas arquillas donde Estavan vnas como diademas 
E ydolos y cuentas E pinjantillos de oro bajo, y tanbien se 
les tomo dos yndios y vna yndia, y bolvimonos al pueblo 
donde desenbarcamos, y estando En esto llega cortes con to- 
dos los navios y despues de Aposentado, la primera cosa que 
hizo, fue mandar hechar preso En grillos al piloto camacho 
porque no Aguardo En la mar Como le fue mandado y des- 
que vio El pueblo sin gente y supo Como pedro de alvarado, 
avia ydo al otro pueblo, E que les avia tomado gallinas y pa- 
ramentos y otras cosillas de poco valor de los ydolos y el oro 
medio cobre, mostro tener mucho Enojo dello, y de Como no 
aguardo el piloto y rreprehendiole gravemente al pedro de 
alvarado y le dixo que no se abian de apa§iguar las tierras 
de aquella manera tomando A los naturales su hazienda, y 
luego mando traer los dos yndios y la yndia que aviamos to- 
mado, y con el yndio melchorejo que llebamos de la punta 
de cotoche que entendia bien aquella lengua les hablo por- 
que julianillo su conpafiero ya se abia muerto, que fuese a 
llamar los ca§iques E yndios de aquel pueblo, E que no ovie- 
sen miedo, y les mando bolver El oro y paramentos y todo 
lo demas y por las gallinas que ya se abian comido, lea man- 
do dar cuentas y caxcaveles, y mas dio a cada yndio vna ca- 
misa de castilla, por manera que fueron A llamar Al sefior 
de aquel pueblo, y otro dia vino El ca§ique con toda su gente, 
hijos y mugeres de todos los del pueblo, y andavan Entre 
nosotros, como si toda su vida nos ovieran tratado, y mando 
cortes que no se les hiziese Enojo ninguno. Aqui En esta ysla 
comen§o cortes A mandar muy de hecho, y nro sefior le da- 



71 



va gra§ia, que doquiera que ponia la mano, se le hazia bien, 
Espegial En pagificar los pueblos y naturales de aquellas par- 
tes, como adelante veran. 



CAPITULO XXV [XXVI] Como cortes 
mando hazer alarde de todo El Exercito, 

y de lo que mas nOS avino de ay a tres dias 
questavamos En cozumel mando hazer Alarde para saber 
que tantos soldados llevava, y hallo por su Cuenta, que Era- 
mos quinientos y ocho, sin maestres y pilotos, y marineros 
queserian §iento||. y diez y seis cavallos y yeguas, las yeguas 
todas eran de juego y de carrera, E onze navios grandes y 
pequenos Con vno que Era como vergantin q traya a cargo 
vn xines nortes y Eran treynta y dos vallesteros, y treze es- 
copeteros, que ansi se llamaban en aql tpo y ^ tiros de bron- 
ce, y quatro falconetes, y mucha polvora y pelotas, y esto 
desta Cuenta de los ballesteros no se me acuerda muy bien, 
no haze al caso de la rrelagion, y hecho El alarde, mando A 
mesa El artillero q ansi se llamaba, E a vn bartolome de vsa- 
gre, E arbenga, E a vn Catalan, que todos Eran artilleros, 
que lo tuviesen muy linpio y adere^ado, y los tiros y pelotas, 
y polvora muy A punto y puso por capitan de lartilleria, a 
vn fran^ de orozco, que avia sido soldado En ytalia. Ansi 
mismo mando a dos ballesteros, maestros de adere§ar balles- 
tas, que se dezian jvan benitez y pedro de guzman el balles- 
tero, que mirasen que todas las ballestas tuviesen a dos y tres 
nuezes, y otras tantas cuerdas E abancuerdas E que sienpre 
tuviesen Cargo de hazer Alma§en y tubiesen gepillo, E yn- 
guijuela y tirasen a terrero, y que los cavallos estuviesen muy 
a punto. no se yo En que gasto agora tanta tinta En meter 
la mano En cosas de aper§ibimiento de armas, y de lo demas, 
porque cortes verdaderamente tenia gran vigilangia En todo. 

1 Testado en el original: '*diez." 



72 



CAPITULO XXVII Como Cortes supo de 
dos Espanoles questavan En poder de yn- 
dios En la punta de cotoche, y lo que so- 
brello se hizo — 




OMO Cortes En todo ponia gran diligengia me man- 
do llamar a mi E a vn vizcayno q se dezia martin 
rramos, y nos pregunto que sentiamos de aquellas 
palabras que nos ovieron dho los yndios de canpeche quan- 
do venimos con fran^isco hernandez de cordova, q dezian 
castilan, castilan, segund lo E dho en el capitulo que dello 
trata y nosotros se lo tornamos a contar segund y de la ma- 
nera que lo aviamos visto E oydo E dixo, que a pensado mu- 
chas veces En ello, E que por ventura Estarian algunos es- 
panoles En aquella tierra y dixo pareyeme que sera bien 
preguntar A estos Caciques de Cogumel si saben alguna nue- 
va dellos, y con melchorejo El de la punta de Cotoche, que 
Entendia ya poca cosa de la lengua de castilla y savia muy 
bien la de Cogumel, se lo pregunto a todos los pringipales y 
todos a vna dixeron q avian Conocido giertos espanoles, y da- 
van sefias dellos y que En la tierra adentro, andadura de dos 
soles, estavan y los tenian por Esclavos vnos cagiques, y que 
alii En cogumel avia yndios mercaderes que les hablaron po- 
cos dias avia de lo qual todos nos alegramos con aquellas nue- 
vas, y dixoles Cortes, que luego los fuesen a llamar, Con car- 
tas que en su lengua llaman amales y dio a los ca§iques y a 
los yndios que fueron Con las cartas Camisas y los halago 
y les dixo q quando bolviesen, les daria, mas quentas, y El 
ca§ique dixo a cortes que Enbiase rrescate para los amos con 
quien estavan q los tenian por esclavos porque los dexasen 
venir y ansi se hizo que se les dio a los mensajeros de todo 



78 

genero de Cuentas, y luego mando aper§ebir dos na^ los 
de menos porte quel vno era poco mayor que vergai y 
con veynte vallesteros y escopeteros y por capitan dellos a 
diego de ordas y mando questuviese en la costa de la punta 
de cotoche aguardando ocho dias con el navio mayor, y en- 
tre tanto que yvan y venian Con la rrespuesta de las cartas, 
con el navio pequefio bolviesen a dar la rrespuesta a cortes 
de lo que hazian porquesta aquella tierra de la punta de Co- 
toche obra de quatro leguas, y se pares^e la vna tierra desde 
la otra, y escrita la carta dezia En ella, senores y hermanos, 
Aqui En Cogumel E sabido questays en poder de vn cagique 
detenidos y os pido por md que luego os vengays Aqui a co- 
§umel que para ello Enbio vn navio con soldados, si los ovie- 
sedes menester y rrescate para dar a Esos yndios con quien 
Estays, y lleva El navio de plazo ocho diaz para os aguardar 
venios con toda brevedad de mi sereys bien mirados y apro- 
vechados, yo quedo En esta ysla, con quinientos soldados, 
y onze navios. En Ellos boy mediante dios la via de vn pue- 
blo que se dize tavasco o potonchan, E luego se Enbarcaron 
En los navios Con las cartas y los dos yndios mercaderes de 
co§umel que las Uevavan y En tres oras Atravesaron El gol- 
fete y Echaron En tierra los mensajeros con las cartas y rres- 
cate y En dos dias las dieron A vn espanol que se dezia ge- 
ronimo de aguilar que Enton§es supimos que ansi se llamaba 
y de aqui adelante Ansi le nonbrare y desque las ovo leydo y 
rres5ebido El rrescate de las quentas q le Enbiamos El se 
holgo con ello y lo llevo a su amo El Ca§ique para q le die- 
se li5en§ia, la qual luego le dio para q se fuese A donde qui- 
siese, y camino el aguilar A donde Estava su conpafiero, que 
se dezia gon5alo guerrero, En otro pueblo ginco leguas de alii, 
y como le leyo las cartas El gon^alo guerrero le rrespondio, 
hermano aguilar yo soy casado y tengo tres hijos, y tienenme 
per cagique y capitan quando Ay guerras, yos vos con dios 
que yo tengo labrada la cara y oradadas las orejas, que diran 
de mi desque me vean, Esos espanoles yr desta manera, E ya 
veys Estos mis hijitos quan bonicos son, por vida vra que me 
deys desas cuentas verdes q traeys, para ellos y dire q mis 

BenuJ Dias del Castillo.— 11, 



74 

hermanos me las Enbian de my trra, y ansi mismo la yndia 
muger del gongalo, hablo al Aguilar En su lengua muy eno- 
jaday le dixo, mira conq viene Este Esclavo A llamar A mi 
marido yos vos y no Cureys de mas platicas, y El Aguilar 
toriio A hablar al gonyalo que mirase que Era xpiano, que 
por vna yndia no se perdiese El anima y si por muger E hi- 
jos lo avia, que la llevase consigo, si no los queria dexar y 
por mas que le dixo y amonesto, no quiso venir y parece ser 
aquel gon§alo guerrero, Era honbre de la mar, natural de 
palos, y desquel geronimo de aguilar vido que no queria ve- 
nir, se vino luego con los dos yndios mensajeros a donde abia 
estado El navio aguardandole y desque llego no le hallo, q 
ya Era ydo, porq ya se abian pasado los ocho dias y avn vno 
mas, que llevo de plazo El ordas para que aguardase porque 
desquel aguilar no venia, se bolvio A co§umel sin llevar rre- 
cavdo a lo que avia venido, y desq El aguilar vio q no esta- 
va Alii El navio quedo muy triste y se bolvio a su amo, al 
pueblo donde antes solia bivir y dexare Esto E dire quando 
cortes vio bolver al ordaz sin rrecavdo ni nueva de los espa- 
noles, ni de los yndios mensajeros, estava tan Enojado y dixo 
Con palabras sobervias al ordas que avia creydo, q otro nae- 
jor rrecaudo truxera que no venirse asi sin los espaiioles ni 
nuevas dellos, porque Qiertamente estavan En aquella tierra 
ya pues En aquel Estante acontegio q vnos marineros, q se 
dezian los peiiates, naturales de gibraleon avian hurtado a 
vn soldado que se dezia berrio giertos toginos y no se los q- 
rian dar y quexose El berrio A cortes, y tomando juramento 
a los marineros, se perjuraron y En la pesquisa paresgio El 
hurto de los quales to§inos Estavan rrepartidos En los siete 
marineros E a quatro dellos los mando luego agotar que no 
Aprovecharon rruegos de ningun Capitan, donde lo dexare, 
asi de los marineros, como esto del aguilar y nos y vamos sin 
el nro viaje hasta su tienpo y sazon, y dire Como venian mu- 
chos yndios En rromeria Aquella ysla de CoQumel, los qua- 
les Eran naturales de los pueblos comarcanos de la punta de 
cotoche y de otras partes de tierra de yucatan, porq segun 
pares§io avia alii en cogumel vnos ydolos de muy disformes 



76 

figuras, y Estavan En vn adoratorio En que Ellos tenian por 
costunbre En aqlla trra por aquel tienpo, de sacrificar y vna 
manana estava Ueno vn patio, donde Estavan los ydolos de 
muchos de yndios E yndias quemando rresina, ques como nro 
yn§ienso, y como Era cosa nueva para nosotros, paramos a 
mirar En ello con aten§ion, y luego se subio En§ima de vn 
adoratorio, vn yndio viejo, con mantas largas, El qual Era 
sa§erdote de aquellos ydolos que ya E dho otras vezes que 
papas los llaman En la nueva espana, y comengo A pedri- 
eallos vn rrato y cortes y todos nosotros mirandolo En q pa- 
raba Aquel negro sermon y cortes pregunto a melchiorejo, 
q Entendia muy bien Aqlla lengua q que Era Aquello que 
dezia aquel yndio biejo y supo que les pedricava cosas ma- 
las, y luego mando llamar al cagique y a todos los prin§ipa- 
les y al mismo papa, y como mejor se pudo darselo A Enten- 
der con aquella nra lengua, y les dixo, q si avian de ser nros 
hermanos q quitasen de aqlla Casa, Aquellos sus ydolos que 
Eran muy malos y les hazian herrar, y q no Eran dioses, si- 
no cosas malas, y q les llebarian al ynfierno sus animas, y se 
les dio a Entender otras Cosas santas y buenas, y que pusie- 
sen vna ymagen De nra seiiora q les dio, y vna cruz y que 
sienpre serian Ayudados y ternian buenas sementeras y se 
salvarian sus animas y se les dixo otras Cosas A§erca de nra 
santa fee, bien dichas y El papa con los cagiques rrespondie- 
ron, que sus antepasados Adoravan En aquellos dioses, por- 
que Eran buenos, y que no se atrevian ellos hazer otra Cosa 
y que se los quitasemos nosotros y veriamos quanto mal nos 
yva dello, porq nos yriamos a perder en la mar, y luego cor- 
tes mando q los despedagasemos y echasemos A rrodar vnas 
gradas Abajo, y ansi se hizo y luego mando traer mucha cal 
q avia harto En aquel pueblo, E yndios albaiiires y se hizo 
vn altar muy linpio donde pusimos la ymagen de nra seiio- 
ra y mando a dos de nros carpinteros, de lo bianco, que se 
dezian Alonso yanez, y alvaro lopez, que higiesen vna cruz, 
de vnos maderos nuevos que alii Estavan, lo qual se puso En 
vno como vmilladero questava hecho gerca del altar, y dixo 
misa el padre q se dezia jvan diaz y El papa y cagique y to- 



76 



dos los yndios Estavai mirando Con atension. llaman En 
esta ysla de Coyumel A los ca9iques!calachiones, Como otra 
vez E dho En lo de pitonchan, y dAxallo E Aqui, y pasare 
Adelante y dire comomos enbarcam^s. 



CAPITULO XXVIII Com.) cortes rrepartio 
los navios y/senalo Capijanes para yr En 
EUos, y ansi mismo se did la ynstru^ion de 
lo qiie aviMi de hazer a lo j pilotos y las se- 
iiales ofe Ids faroles de nocjhe y otras cosaa/ 
que JX(fs\lvmo. : / / 



SSKJ- / 




■ I 

I 

OR[rtS lleVaba la Capitana. 

p bAfo de alvarado y sus hermanos vn buen navio, 
que se dezia^Sant Sebastian — 

Alonso hwnandez puerto carrero otro — 

franyisco/de m)ntejo o{to^ buen navio. 

xpoual de pli, otro. 

diego de oraa^ otro. 

juan ViGlasquez de leon ptro 

juan descalante otro •: 

fran?^ de rndrla otro / 

otro esCobanel paje / 

y El mas chwjo Comoj vergantin, gines nortes 

En cada navjo su pilbto, y por piloto mayor anton de ala- 
minoB, y las ynptru§ioies por donde se avian de rregir, y lo 
que avian de hazer, y,de noche las senas de los faroles y cor- 
tes se despidio ;de los Cagiques y papas y les Encomendo 
Aquella ymagen de nra senora y a la cruz, que la rreveren^ia- 
sen y tuviesen linpio y Enrramado, y verian quanto prove- 
cho dello les venia y dixeron que ansi lo harian y traxeronle 



/ 



77 

quatro gallinas, y dos jarros de miel y se abragaroh y Enbar- 
cados que fuemos, en giertos dias del mes de margo, de mill 
E quinientos y diez y nueve afios, dimos velas, y con muy 
buen tienpo ybamos nra derrota e aquel mismo dia a ora de 
las diez, dan desde vna nao grandes bozes, E capean, y tira- 
ron vn tiro, para q todos los navios q veniamos En conserva 
lo oyesen y como cortes lo bio e oyo, se paro luego En el bor- 
do de la capitana E vido yr Arrivando El navio En que be- 
nia j van desCalante, que se bolvia hazia Cogumel y dixo cor- 
tes a otras naos que venian alii §erca qs aquello ques Aquello, 
E vn soldado, que se dezia luis de §aragoza, le rrespondio que 
se anegaba El navio de Escalante q Era A donde y va El ca- 
§abi y Cortes dixo, plega A dios no tengamos Algun desman 
y mando Al piloto Alaminos, q hiziese sefias a todos los na- 
vios, que Arribasen A co§umel, Ese mismo dia bolvimos al 
puerto donde salimos, y descargamos El cagabi y hallamos 
la ymagen de nra senora y la cruz, muy linpio y puesto yn- 
5ienso y dello nos alegramos, y luego vino El ca§ique y pa- 
pas A hablar A Cortes y le preguntaron q A que bolviamos 
y dixo que porque hazia agua vn navio y le queria Adobar 
y q les rrogaba que con todas sus Canoas ayudasen a los ba- 
teles A sacar El pan Cagabi E ansi lo hizieron y estuvimos 
En adobar El navio quatro dias y dexemos de hablar en ello 
y dire Como lo supo El espanol questava En poder de yn- 
dios, que se dezia Aguilar, y lo que mas hizimos. 



78 



CAPITULO XXVIII [XXIX] Como El es- 
panol questava en poder de yndios se 11a- 
mava geronimo de Aguilar supo Como 
Abiamos arribado A coqumel, y se vino A 
nosotros y lo que mas paso. 




UANDO tuvo noti§ia gierta El espafiol questava En 
poder de yndios que aviamos buelto A cogumel 
Con los navios, se alegro En gran manera y die 
gragias a dios y mucha priesa En se venir El y los dos yn- 
dios que le llevaron las cartas y rrescate A se Embarcar En 
vna canoa, y como la pago bien En quentas verdes del rres- 
cate que le enbiamos, luego la hallo alquilada con seys yn- 
dios rremeros con ella y dan tal priesa En rremar que En 
Espa§io de poco tienpo pasaron El golfete, que ay de vna 
tierra a la otra, que serian quatro leguas, sin tener contras- 
te de la mar y llegados A la costa de Co§umel, ya questavan 
desEnbarcando dixeron a cortes vnos soldados que yban a ca- 
zar porq abia En aqlla ysla puercos de la trra que a via 
venido vna canoa grande alii junto del pueblo y q venia de 
la punta de cotoche y mando Cortes a Andres de tapia, y A 
otros dos soldados q fuesen a ver que cosa nueva Era venir 
alii junto a nosotros yndios sin temor ninguno, con canoas 
grandes, y luego fueron y desque los yndios que venian en 
la canoa, que trayan Al aguilar, vieron los espanoles, tuvie- 
ron temor y querianse tornar a enbarcar E hazer A lo largo 
con la canoa, y aguilar les dixo En su lengua, que no tuvie- 
sen miedo, que Eran sus hermanos, y El Andres de tapia, 



79 

Como los vio que Eran yndios, porquel aguilar ni mas ni 
menos Era que yndio, luego Enbio a dezir A Cortes con vn 
espanol q syete yndios de Co§umel son los q alii llegaron 
En la canoa y despues q ovieron saltado En tierra, El espa- 
nol mal mascado y peor pronun§iado, dixo, dios y santama- 
ria E sebilla y luego le fue abragar El tapia y otro soldado 
de los que Abia ydo co El tapia A ver que cosa era fue A 
mucha priesa A demandar albricias A cortes, como Era Es- 
panol El que venia En la canoa, de que todos nos alegramos 
y luego se bino El tapia Con El Espanol A donde Estava 
Cortes, y antes que llegasen giertos soldados preguntavan al 
tapia ques del Espanol, E avnq yva junto con El porq le 
tenian por yndio propio, porque de suyo era moreno y tres- 
quilado A manera de yndio Esclavo y traya vn rremo Al 
hombro vna cotara vieja Cal^ada y la otra Atada En la cin- 
tura y vna manta vieja muy rruyn E vn braguero peor, 
Con q cubria sus verguen§as, y traya atada en la manta vn 
bulto que eran oras muy viejas, pues desque Cortes los vio 
de aquella manera tanbien pico, Como los demas soldados 
que pregunto al tapia que que Era del espanol, y El espanol 
Como le entendio, se puso En cuclillas como hazen los yn- 
dios E dixo yo soy, y luego le mando dar de vestir, Camisa 
y jubon y §araguelles, y caperuga, y alparagates, q otros bes- 
tidos no avia, y le pregunto de su vida y como se Uamava, 
y euando vino Aquella tierra, y El dixo, avnque no bien pro- 
nun§iado, que se dezia geronimo de Aguilar y que Era na- 
tural de Egixa, y que tenia ordenes de Evangelio, q avia 
• ocho afios que se avia perdido El y otros quinze honbres y 
dos mugeres, que yvan desde el daryen A la ysla de santo 
domingo, quando ovo vnas diferen§ias y pleytos de vn en- 
ciso y baldibia y dixo que llebavan diez mil pesos de oro y 
los pro§esos de los vnos contra los otros, y quel navio En que 
yvan, dio en los alacranes, que no pudo navegar, y que En 
el batel del mismo navio se metieron El y sus conpaneros y 
dos mugeres creyendo tomar la ysla de Cuba o A xamayca, 
y que las Corrientes Eran muy grandes, que les hecho En 
aquella tierra y que los Calachionis de aquella comarca los 



80 

rrepartieron Entre si, E que avian sacrificado a los ydolos, 
muchos de sus conpafieros y dellos se avian muerto de do- 
lengia y las mugeres q poco tienpo pasado a via que de tra- 
bajo tanbien se murieron porque las hazian moler, E que A 
El que tenian para sacrificar, y vna noche se huyo y se fue 
Aquel ca§ique con quien Estava ya no se me Acuerda El 
nonbre, que alii le nonbro y que no avian quedado de todos 
sino El E vn gongalo guerrero y dixo que le fue A llamar 
y no quiso venir y dio muchas gragias a dios por todo y 
le dixo Cortes que del seria . bien mirado y gratificado 
y le pregunto por la tierra y pueblos y El aguilar dixo 
que Como le tenian por Esclavo, que no sabia sino servir de 
traer leiia y agua y En cavar los mayzales que no avia sali- 
do sino hasta quatro leguas, que le llevaron con vna carga y 
que no la pudo llevar E cayo malo dello, E que A Enten- 
dido que ay muchos pueblos y luego le pregunto por El 
gon§alo guerrero, y dixo questaba Casado y tenia tres hijos, 
' E que tenia labrada la cara y oradas las orejas y El bezo de 
Abajo, y que Era honbre de la mar de palos, y que los yn- 
dios le tienen por Esforgado, E que avia poco mas de vn ano, 
que quando vinieron a la punta de cotoche, vn capitan Con 
tres navios, pare§e ser q fueron quando benymos los de 
fran§isco hernandez de cordoba, que El fue ynventor que 
nos diesen la guerra que nos dieron E que vino El alii jun- 
tamente con vn cagique de un gran pueblo segund E ya dho 
En lo de fran^ hernandez de cordoba y despues que Cortes 
lo oyo dixo, En verdad que le querria Aver a las manos, por- 
que jamas sera bueno y dexallo E y dire, como los cagiques 
de Co§umel, desque vieron al aguilar, que hablava su len- 
gua, le davan muy bien de comer, y el aguilar les Aconse- 
java que sienpre tuviesen acato y rreverengia A la santa 
ymagen de nra seiiora y a la cruz, y que conos§erian que por 
ello les venia mucho bien, y los cagiquez por Consejo de 
aguilar demandaron vna carta de fabor A cortes para que si 
viniesen Aquel puerto otros espanoles, que fuesen bien tra- 
tados, y no les hiziesen Agravios, la qual carta luego se la 
dio y despues de despedidos con muchos Alagos y ofresgi- 



81 



mientos, nos hizimos a la vela para el mo de grijalva y des- 
ta manera que E dicho se wo Aguilar y no de otra, como lo 
Escrive el coronista gomara y no me maravillo pues lo que 
dize es por nuevas y bolvamos a nra rrelagion. 



CAPITULO XXIX [XXX] Como nos tor- 
namos A Enbarcar y nos hizimos A la ve- 
la para El rrio de grijalva, y lo que nos avi- 

no lin el Viaje — en quatro dias del mes de margo 
de mill E quinientos y diez y nueve aiios aviendo tan buen 
su§eso En llevar buena lengua y fiel, mando Cortes que 
nos Enbarcasemos, segund y de la manera q aviamos venido 
antes que arribasemos A Co§umel y con las mismas ynstru- 
5iones y senas de los faroles para de noche, E yendo nave- 
gando, con buen tienpo, rrebuelve vn viento ya q queria 
Anoche9er, tan rrezio y Contrario, que Echo cada navio por 
su parte con harto rriesgo de dar En tierra, E quiso dios, 
que A media noche afloxo y desq amanes5io luego se bolvie- 
ron a juntar todos los navios, E§eto vno En que yva juan 
Velasquez de leon E yvamos nro viaje sin saber del, hasta 
medio dia, de lo qual llevamos pena, creyendo fuese perdi- 
do En vnos bajos, y desque se pasava El dia y no paresgio 
dixo Cortes al piloto alaminos que no era bueno yr mas ade- 
lante sin saber del, y el piloto hizo senas a todos los navios 
questuviesen al rreparo Aguardando si por ventura le echo 
El tienpo En alguna Ensenada donde no podia salir por ser- 
le El biento contrario, y desque no venia dixo el piloto a 
Cortes, senor tenga por §ierto q se metio En vno como puer- 
to o vaya q queda Atras, y que El viento no le dexa salir, 
porquel piloto que lleba Es el que vino Con frangisco Her- 
nandez y bolvio Con grijalva, que se dezia joan alvarez El 
manquillo, y sabe aquel puerto, y luego fue acordado de bol- 
ver a le buscar Con toda la armada, y En aquella baya don- 
de avia dho El piloto lo hallamos anclado de que todos ovi- 

B^rnal Pto del CastUlo,— 12. 



82 

mos plazer, y Estuvimos alii vn dia y Echamos dos bateles 
En el agua y salto En tierra El piloto E vn capitan que se 
dezia frangisco de lugo y avia por alii vnas estangias, donde 
avia mayzales, y hazian sal, y tenian quatro Cues que son 
Casas de ydolos, y En ellos muchas figuras y todas las mas 
de mugeres y eran altas de cuerpo y se puso nonbre aquella 
tierra la punta de las mugeres, Acuerdome que dezia El Agui- 
lar que gerca de aquellas estangias Estava El pueblo donde 
Era Esclavo, y que Alii vino cargado, que lo truxo su amo, 
E que cayo malo de traer la carga, E que tanbien Estava no 
muy lexos El pueblo donde Estava gonyalo guerrero E que 
todos tenian oro sino que Era poco, y que si queria que le 
guiaria, E que fuesemos alia y Cortes le dixo rriendo, que 
no venia El para tan pocas cosas, sino para servir a dios y al 
rrey, y luego mando cortes a vn capitan que se dezia Esco- 
bar, que fuese En el navio de q Era capitan que Era muy 
belero, y demandava poca Agua hasta boca de terminos y 
mirase muy bien, que tierra Era y si Era buen puerto pa- 
ra poblar y si avia mucha caga Como le avian ynformado y 
Esto q le mando fue por consejo del piloto porque quando 
por alii pasasemos Con todos los navios no nos detener En 
entrar En el, y que despues de visto, que pusiese vna seiial 
y quebrase arboles En la boca del puerto, o escriviesen vna 
carta y la pusiese donde la viesemos de vna parte o de otra 
del puerto para que Conosgiesemos que avia Entrado dentro, 
o que aguardase En la mar a la armada barlobenteando des- 
pues que lo oviese visto, y luego El escobar partio y fue A 
puerto de terminos, que ansi se llama, E hizo todo lo que le 
fue mandado, y hallo la lebrela que se ovo quedado quando 
lo de grijalva, y estava gorda y luzia, y dixo El Escobar que 
quando la lebrela vio El navio que Entrava En El puerto 
questava Alagando Con la Cola y haziendo otras senas de 
Alagos, y se vino luego a los soldados y se metio Con Ellos 
En la nao, y Esto hecho, se salio el escobar del puerto a la 
mar y estava Esperando El armada y paresge ser, con biento 
sur que le dio, no pudo esperar al rreparo, y metiose mucho 
En la mar, bolvamos a nra armada, que quedavamos En la 



punta de las mugeres que otro dia de mafiana salimos con 
buen teral, y llegamos En boca de terminos, y desque no 
hallamos a escobar mando Cortes, que sacasen El batel y 
con diez vallesteros le fuesen a buscar en la boca de termi- 
nos, o a ver si avia sefial o carta, y luego se hallo arboles cor- 
tados y vna carta En que En ella dezia q Era muy buen puer- 
to y buena tierra y de mucha Ca§a y lo de ]a lebrela, y dixo 
El piloto alaminos A cortes que fuesemos nra derrota porque 
con el viento sur se debiera aver metido En la mar E que no 
podria yr muy lexos porque abia de navegar A orga, y pues- 
to que Cortes sintio pena no le oviese Acaesgido Algun des- 
man, mando meter belas y luego le alcangamos, y dio el esco- 
bar sus descargos A cortes y la cavsa por q no pudo aguardar, 
estando En esto llegamos En el paraje del pueblo de poton- 
chan y cortes mando Al piloto que surgesemos En aquella 
Ensenada, y el piloto rrespondio que era mal puerto, porq 
avian de estar los havios surtos mas de dos leguas lexos de 
tierra, que mengua mucho la mar porque tenia pensamiento 
cortes de dalles vna buena mano por el desbarate de fran^is- 
00 hernandez de Cordova, E grijalba, y muchos de los solda- 
dos que nos aviamos hallado En Aquellas batallas, se lo su- 
plicamos q Entrase dentro, y no qdasen sin buen castigo y 
avnq se detuviese alii dos o tres dias. El piloto alaminos con 
otros pilotos porfiaron q si alii entravamos, q en ocho dias 
no podriamos salir por El tienpo Contrario y q Agora lleba- 
vamos buen viento, E que En dos dias llegariamos A tavasco, 
y ansi pasamos de largo, y En tres dias q navegamos, llega- 
mos Al rrio de grijalva, que es nonbrado en lengua de yndios 
de tabasco, y lo q alii nos acaes§io E las guerras q nos die- 
ron, dire adelante. 



84 



CAPITULO XXXI. Como llegamos Al mo 
de grijalba, q En lengua de yndios Uaman 
tabasco, y de la guerra que nos dieron j 
lo que mas con ellos pasamos. 




I N doze dias del mesmo margo, de mill E quinientos 
y diez y nueve afios, llegamos Con toda la arma- 
da Al rrio de grijalva, q se dize tabasco, y como 
sabiamos ya de quado lo de grijalva, q En aquel puerto y 
rrio no podian entrar navios de mucho porte, surgeron En 
la mar los mayores, y con los pequeiios y los bateles fuymos 
todos los soldados a desEnbarcar a la punta de los palma- 
res, Como quando Con grijalba, questaba del pueblo de ta- 
basco, obra de media legua y andavan por El rrio y en la 
rribera, E entre vnos manbrales, todo lleno de yndios gue- 
rreros, de lo qual nos maravillamos, los que aviamos venido 
Con grijalva y demas desto estavan juntos En el pueblo, 
mas de ^ doze mill guerreros aparejados para darnos guerra, 
porq En Aquella sazon aquel pueblo Era de mucho trato, y 
estaban subjetos a el otros grandes pueblos, y todos los te- 
nian Apercibidos, Con todo genero de armas segun las vsa- 
van y la cavsa dello fue porque los de potonchan y los de 
lazaro y otros pueblos comarcanos los tuvieron por cobardes, 
y se lo davan En rrostro, por cavsa q dieron A grijalva las 
joy as de oro que antes E dicho en el Capit^ q dello abla, E 
q de medrosos no nos osaron dar guerra, pues Eran mas pue- 
blos y tenian mas guerreros que no Ellos, y esto les dezian 
por afrentallos y q En sus pueblos nos avian dado guerra y 
muerto cinquenta y seis honbres, por manera q Con aque- 

1 Testado en el original: **veintiocho mill.*' 



86 

Has palabras q les avian dho se determinaron a tomar armas, 
y desq Cortes los vio puestos en aqlla manera dixo a Agui- 
lar la lengua q Entendia bien la de tabasco, que dixese a 
vnos yndios, que pares^ian prin§ipales, que pasaban En una 
gran canoa §erca de nosotros, que para q andavan tan Albo- 
rotados, q no les benyamos A hazer ningun mal, sino dezi- 
lles que les qremos dar de lo q traemos, Como A hermanos 
E que les rrogava q mirasen no Encomen^asen la guerra 
porque les pesaria dello, y les dixo otras muchas cosas Ager- 
ca de la paz, y mientra mas lo dezia El aguilar, mas bravos 
se mostravan y dezian q nos matarian A todos, si Entrava- 
mos En su pueblo, porq le tenian muy fortale§ido todo A la 
rredonda de arboles muy gruesos, de §ercas y albarradas y 
bolvio aguilar a hablalles con la paz, y que nos dexasen tomar 
agua, y conprar de comer, a trueco de nro rrescate, y tan- 
bien [a] dezir a los calachonis cosas q sean de su provecho y 
sui§io de dios nro senor y todavia Ellos a porfiar q no pasa- 
semos de aquellos palmares adelante si no que nos matarian 
y desq aquello vio cortes, mando aper9ebir los bateles y na- 
viosmenores y mando poner En cada batel tres tiros y rre- 
partio en ellos los ballesteros y escopeteros y teniamos me- 
moria de quando lo de grijalva, que yva vn camino angosto 
desde los palmares al pueblo, por vnos Arroyos E mando 
Cortes A tres soldados que aquella noche mirasen bien si 
yba a las casas, y que no se detuviesen mucho en traer la 
rrespuesta, y los q fueron vieron q si yva, y visto todo Esto, 
y despues de bien mirado, se nos paso aquel dia dando or- 
den En como y de que manera aviamos de yr En los bateles, 
y otro dia por la maJaana despues de aver oydo misa y todas 
nras Armas muy A punto, mando cortes A alonso de abila, 
que Era Capitan, q Con §ient soldados y Entre Ellos diez 
ballesteros, fuese por el caminillo, E que dho q yba al pue- 
blo, E q desque oyese los tiros. El por vna parte y nosotros 
por otra, diesemos En el pueblo, y Cortes y todos \6s mas 
soldados y Capitanes, fuymos En los bateles y navios de me- 
no8 porte, por el rrio Arriba, y desque los yndios guerreros 
que Estaban En la costa y Entre los manblares, vieron q de 



86 

hecho yvamos, vienen sobre nosotros con tantas Canoas Al 
puerto A donde aviamos de desEnbarcar, para defendernos 
q no saltasemos En tierra, que toda la costa no avia sino yn- 
dios de guerra c6 todo genero de armas q Entre ellos se vsan 
taiiendo tronpetillas, y caracoles, y atabalejos, y desque asi 
bio la cosa, mando cortes q nos detuviesemos vn poco y q 
no soltasen ballesta, ni escopeta, ni tiros, y como todas las 
cosas queria llevar muy justificadas, les hizo otro rrequiri- 
miento delante de vn escribano del rrey y que se dezia die- 
go de godoy, E por la lengua de aguilar, para que nos dexa- 
sen saltar En tierra, y tomar agua, y hablalles Cosas de dios 
y de su magestad, y q si guerra nos davan, q si por defen- 
dernos algunas muertes oviese o otros cualesquier danos, 
fuesen A su Culpa E cargo, y no a la nra y Ellos todavia ha- 
ziendo muchos fieros, y q no saltasemos en tierra, si no q nos 
matarian y luego comengaron muy valientemente a flechar 
y hazer sus senas Con sus tanbores, y como Esfor§ados se 
vienen todos contra nosotros, y nos gercan co las canoas con 
tan gran rro^iada de flecha, q nos hizieron detener En el 
agua hasta la §inta y otras partes no tanto E como avia alii 
mucha lama y §ienega, no podiamos tan presto salir della, y 
cargan sobre nosotros tantos yndios q Con las langas A man- 
teniente y otros A flecharnos hazian q no tomasemos tierra 
tan presto Como quisieramos y tanbien porque En aquella 
lama Estava Cortes peleando y se le quedo vn alpargate En 
el §ieno que no le pudo sacar y descalgo El vn pie salio a 
trra, y luego le sacaron El alpargate y se cal§o, y entre tanto 
que Cortes estava en esto todos nosotros ansi capitanes como 
soldados fuimos sobre ellos nonbrando a sefior Santiago y les 
hezimos rretraer y avnque no muy lexos, por Amor de las 
albarradas y gercas q tenian hechas de maderas gruesas, A 
donde se manparavan hasta q las deshizimos y tuvimos lu- 
gar por vn portillo de les entrar y pelear Con ellos, y les 
llevamos por vna calle Adelante A donde tenian hechas 
otras fuei-yas, y alii tornaron a rreparar y hager cara y pe- 
leavan muy valientemente y Con gran esfuergo, y dando 
bozes y silvos E dezian Al calacheoni, al calacheoni, q en su 



87 

lengua mandavan q matasen o prendiesen A nro capitan, 
Estando desta manera Enbueltos Con Ellos vino alonzo de 
Avila Con sus soldados, q Avia ydo por tierra desde los pal- 
mares, como dho tengo, y pares§e ser no A§erto a venir mas 
presto, por Amor de vnas gienegas y Esteros y su tardanga 
fue bien menester segun aviamos Estado detenidos En los 
rrequirimientos y deshazer portillos En las Albarradas para 
pelear, Ansi q todos juntos lee tornamos a Echar de las fuer- 
jas donde Estaban, y les llevamos rretrayendo, y ^iertamen- 
te q como buenos guerreros nos yvan tirando grandes rro- 
giadas de flechas^y varas tostadas, y nunca bolvieron de he- 
cho las Espaldas, hasta vn gran patio, donde Estaban vnos 
aposentos y salas grandes, y tenian tres casas de ydolos E ya 
avian Uevado todo quanto hato avia, En los Cues de Aquel 
patio, mando Cortes q rreparasemos, y q no fuesemos mas 
En seguimiento del Alcange, pues yvan huyendo y alii to- 
mo Cortes posesion de Aquella tierra por su magestad y El 
En su rreal nonbre y fue desta manera, que desEnbaynada 
8U Espada dio tres cuchilladas En senal de posesion En vn 
Arbol grande q se dize §ey va, questava En la plaga de aquel 
gran patio, y dixo que si avia Alguna persona que se lo §on- 
tradixese q El lo defenderia Con su espada, y vna rrodela 
que tenia Enbra§ada y todos los soldados que presentes nos 
hallamos quando Aquello paso, rrespondimos q Era bien to- 
mar Aqlla rreal posesion En nonbre de su mg E que noso- 
tros seriamos En Ayudalle, si Alguna persona otra cosa con- 
tradixere E por Ante vn Escribano del rrey se hizo Aquel 
avto — sobre esta posesion la parte de di^ velasqz tubo q rre- 
mormurar della. Acuerdome que en aquellas rrenidas gue- 
rras que nos dieron de aqlla vez firieron A catorze soldados 
y A mi me dieron vn flechazo En el muslo, mas poca heri- 
da y quedaron tendidos y muertos diez E ocho yndios En 
El agua, donde desEnbarcamos y alii dormimos Aquella no- 
che Con grandes velas y Escuchas, y dexallo E. por contar 
lo que mas pasamos 



88 



C APITULO XXXIL Como mando cortes A 
dos capitanes q fuesen con cada gient sol- 
dados a ver la tierra dentro y lo q sobrello 
nos Acaescio — 




TRO Dia de man ana Mando Cortes a p^ de alvarado 
, t^ q saliese por capitan de gient soldados, y Entre EUos 
L ijuinze ballesteros y escopeteros, y que fuese a ver 

la tierra adentro hasta andadura de dos leguas, y q lie vase 
En su conpaiiia A melchiorejo, la lengua de la punta de Co- 
toche y quando le fueron a llamar al melchiorejo no le ha- 
llaron que se avia huydo Con los de aquel pueblo de tabasco, 
porq segun paresQia, El dia antes En la punta de los palma- 
res dexo, Colgados sus bestidos que tenia de Castilla, y se fue 
de noche En vna canoa, y cortes sintio Enojo Con su yda, 
porque no dixese A los yndios sus naturales Algunas Cosas 
que no nos traxesen poco provecho. dexemosle ydo con la 
mala ventura, y bolvamos a nro Cuento, que ansi mismo 
mando cortes q fuese otro Capitan que se dezia fran§isco de 
lugo, por otra parte, con otros §ient soldados y doze balles- 
teros y escopeteros, y que no pase de otras dos leguas, y que 
bolviese A la noche a dormir En el rreal E yendo que yba 
El fran^isco de lugo Con su conpaiiia, obra de vna legua de 
nro rreal se Encontro con grandes Capitanias E esquadrones 
de yndios, todos flecheros y Con langas y rrodelas, y atan bo- 
res, y penachos, y se vienen derechos a la capitania de nros 
soldados, y les 5ercan por todas partes E les comengaron A 
flechar de arte que no se podia sustentar con tanta multitud 
de yndios, y le tiravan muchas varas tostadas. y piedras con 
hondas, q como granizo cayan sobre Ellos, y co espadas de 



navajas de a dos manos, y por bien que peleaba El frangisco 
de lugo y sus soldados, no les podia Apartar de si, y desque 
Aquello vio, Con gran Con§iei1;o se venia ya rretrayendo Al 
rreal, y ya avia Enbiado vn yndio de Cuba gran Corredor e 
suelto A dar mandado A cortes para que le fuesemos a ayu- 
dar y todavia El frangisco de lugo con gran congierto de sus 
vallesteros y escopeteros, vnos armando y otros tirando, y 
' algunas arremetidas q hazian, se sostenian con todos los Es- 
quadrones que sobre El estavan y dexemosle de la manera 
que E dho E Con gran peligro, y bolvamos Al capitan pedro 
. de alvarado, que paresge ser avia andado mas de vna legua y 
topo con un estero muy malo de pasar E quiso dios Enca- 
minallo q buelve por otro camino hazia donde Estava El 
fran?^ de lugo peleando como dho es, y como oyo las Es- 
copetas que tiraban y El gran rruydo de atanbores, y tron- 
petillas, y bozes, E silvos de los yndios, bien Entendio ques- 
tavan rrebueltos En guerra, y Con mucha presteza y gran 
congierto Acudio A las bozes y tiros y hallo Al capitan 
fran?® de lugo con su gente haziendo rrostro y peleando con 
los contrarios y ginco yndios de los cotrarios muertos, y des- 
que se juntaron con el lugo, dan tras los yndios, que los hi- 
zieron apartar y no de manera que los pudiesen poner En 
huyda, que todabia les fueron siguiendo los yndios hasta El 
rreal y ansi mismo nos avian acometido otras capitanias de 
guerreros a donde estava cortes con los heridos, mas muy 
presto les hezimos rretraer con los tiros q llevaban muchos 
dellos y a buenas cuchilladas, y quando Cortes oyo al yndio 
de Cuba q benya A demandar socorro, y del arte q queda- 
va frangisco de lugo, de presto les yvamos A ayudar y noso- 
tros que yvamos y los dos capitanes por mi nonbrados que 
Uegaban con sus gentes y a obra de media legua del rreal, y 
murieron dos soldados de la capitania de frangisco de lugo 
y ocho heridos y de la de pedro de alvarado le hirieron tres, y 
desq vinieron al rreal se curaron, y Enterraron los muertos, 
y ovo buena vela y escuchas, y En aquellas Escaramugas se 
mataron quinze yndios y prendieron tres, y el vno paresgia 
Algo pringipal, y aguilar la lengua les preguntaba que por q 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo.— 13. 



90 

Eran locos y que por q salian A dar guerra, y q mirasen q les 
matariamos si otra vez bolviesen y luego se Enbio vn yndio 
dellos con Cuentas para dar A los ca§iques q viniesen de paz 
y aquel mensajero q Enbiamos dixo q El yndio melchiorejo 
q trayamos Con nosotros q Era de la punta de cotoche, q se 
;fue la noche antes a Ellos y les aconsejo que diesen guerra 
■ de dia y de noche, E q nos vengerian E q Eramos muy po- 
•cos de manera que trayamos con nosotros muy mala Ayuda 
' e nro cotrario E aquel yndio q Enbiamos por mensajero fue 
E nunca bolvio, y de los otros dos supo Aguilar por muy 
§ierto, que para otro dia estavan juntos todos quantos Ca- 
ciques avia En todos aquellos pueblos comarcanos de aqlla 
provingia, con sus armas Aparejados pa nos dar guerra y nos 
avian de venir otro dia a gercar En El rreal y quel melchio- 
rejo, la lengua, se lo Aconsejo, y dexallo E aqui E dire lo que 
sobrello se hizo — 



C APITULO XXXIII Como Cortes mando q 
para otro dia nos aparejasemos todos para 
yr En busca de los Esquadrones guerreros, 
y mando sacar los cavallos de los navios, y 
lo q mas nos abino En la batalla q con 
ellos tubimos. — 

desque Cortes supo q muy Qiertamente nos venian A dar 
guerra mando que Con brevedad sacasen todos los cavallos 
de los navios a tierra E que Escopeteros y vallesteros y to- 
dos los soldados Estuviesemos muy A punto'Con nras armas 
y avnquestuviesemos heridos, y desq ovieron sacado los ca- 
vallos En tierra Estavan muy torpes, y temerosos En el co- 
rrer Como avia muchos dias q estavan En los navios y otro 
dia estuvieron sueltos — vna cosa Acaes§io En aquella sazon 
a seys o siete soldados man§ebos e bien dispuestos, q les die 



91 

mal de lomos, q no se podian tener En pie, si no los llebavan 
A cuestas, no supimos de que les rresulto an dho que de las 
armas de algodon, q no se quitavan de noche ni de dia de 
los Cuerpos e porq En Cuba eran rregalados E no eran acos- 
tunbrados A trabajos y con el calor les dio aquel mal y lue- 
go Cortes les mando llebar A los navios, no quedasen En tie- 
rra, y aper§ibio A los cavalleros, que avian de yr los mejores 
ginetes, y cavallos, E que fuesen con pretales de Cascaveles, 
y les mando q no se parasen A lan§ear hasta averles desba- 
ratado, sino que las langas se las pasasen por los rrostros, y 
sefialo treze de cavallo y El Cortes por capitan dellos y fue- 
ron estos que aqui nonbrare. Cortes e xpoval de oly y pedro 
de alvarado, y alonso hernandez puerto carrero y joan des- 
calante y fran?^ de montejo, E Alonso de avila le dieron vn 
cavallo que Era de ortiz El musico, E de vn bartolome gar- 
(jia, que ninguno dellos Era buen ginete, y joan velasquez 
de leon, y frangisco de morla, E lares El buen ginete, non- 
brole Asi, porq Abia otro lares, E gon^alo dominguez, estre- 
j mado honbre de a cavallo, moron El del bayamo, y pero gon- 
! jalez de truxillo, todos estos cavalleros sefialo Cortes y El 
[ por capitan y mando A mesa El artillero, que tuviese muy A 
punto su artilleria, y mando A diego de ordas, que fuese por 
capitan de todos nosotros los soldados y avn de los valleste- 
ros y escopeteros, porq no era onbre de a cavallo y otro dia 
I muy De manana, que fue dia de nra senora de margo, des- 
pues de oydo misa, q nos dixo fray bartolome de olmedo, 
puestos todos En ordenanga con nro alferez q Entonces Era 
antonio de villa rroel, marido que fue de ysabel de ojeda, 
que despues se mudo El nonbre el billa rroel y se llamo an- 
tonio Serrano de cardona, fuymos por vnas §abanas grandes 
A donde avian dado guerra A fran^isco de lugo y a pedro 
de alvarado y llamavase aquella §abana, y pueblo, gintla sub- 
, jeto Al mismo tabasco, vna legua del aposento donde salimos 
y nro cortes se aparto vn poco Espagio de trecho de nosotros, 
I por amor de vnas §ienegas q no podian pasar los cavallos, E 
yendo de la manera q E dho, dimos con todo El poder de 
Esquadrones de yndios guerreros que venian ya A buscar- 



nos a los aposentos, y fue junto al mismo pueblo de 9intla, 
En vn buen llano, por manera q si Aqllos guerreros tenian 
deseo de nos dar guerra y nos y van a buscar, nosotros los 
Encontramos con el mismo motivo, y dexallo E aqui y dire 
lo que paso En la batalla, y bien se puede nonbrar ansi co- 
mo adelante veran 



C APITULO XXXIV. Como nos dieron ge- 
rra e vna gran batalla todos los Cacjiques 
de tabasco y sus provinqias, y lo que so- 
brello subgedio. 

y ya E dicho de la manera y con§ierto que yvamos y topa- 
mos todas las Capitanias y esqnadrones que nos yban A bus- 
car y trayan grandes penachos, y atanbores, y tronpetillas, 
y las caras almagradas blancas y prietas y con grandes Arcos 
y flechas, y langas y rrodelas y espadas como montantes de a 
dos manos, y muchas ondas y piedra, y varas tostadas, y ca- 
da vno sus Armas Colchadas de algodon, y ansi Como llega- 
ron A nosotros, Como Eran grandes Escuadrones, q todas las 
^avanas Cobrian y se vienen Como rrabiosos y nos gercan por 
todas partes, y tiran tanta de flecha y vara y piedra, q de la 
primera Arremetida, hirieron mas de setenta de los nros, y 
con las lan§as pie con pie, nos hazian mucho dafio, E vn sol- 
dado murio luego de vn flechazo que le dieron por el oydo 
y no hazian sino flechar E herir En los nros, y nosotros con 
los tiros y escopetas, y ballestas y a grandes estocadas, no 
perdiamos punto de buen pelear y poco a poco desq conos- 
§ieron las estocadas se apartavan de nosotros mas Era para 
flechar mas A su salvo, puesto que mesa El artillero Con los 
tiros, les mato muchos dellos, porq como Eran grades esqua- 
drones y no se apartavan, dava En ellos A su plazer y con 
todos los males y eridos q les haziamos, no los podimos Apar- 
tar. yo dixe, diego de ordas pares§eme q podemos Apechu- 



93 

gar Con ellos, porq verdaderamente sienten bien El cortar 
de las espadas y estocadas, y por esto se desbian Algo de no- 
sotros, por temor dellas, y por mejor tirarnos sus flechas y 
varas tostadas, y tantas piedras como granizos y rrespondio, 
que no Era buen Acuerdo, porque avia para cada vno de no- 
80tro3 trezientos yndios y q no nos podriamos sustener Con 
tanta multitud, y ansi Estavamos Con ellos sosteniendonos 
y Acordamos de nos allegar quanto pudiesemos a ellos como 
se lo avia dho al ordas, para dalles mal ano de estocadas y 
bien lo sintieron que se pasaron de la parte de vna §ienega, 
y En todo Este tienpO Cortes con los de A cavallo no venia 
y avnque le deseavamos y temiamos q por bentura no le 
obiese Acaes^ido algund desastre Acuerdome q quando sol- 
tavamos los tiros q davan los yndios grandes silvos E gritos 
y Echavan pajas y tierra En alto, porque no viesemos El 
dano que les haziamos, y tanian atanbores, y tronpetillas E 
silvos y bozes, y dezian Alala Alala. Estando En esto vimos 
asomar los de A cavallo, y como aquellos grandes Esquadro- 
nes Estaban Enbebezidos dandonos guerra, no miraron tan 
de presto En ellos como venian por las espaldas, y como El 
canpo Era llano y los caballeros buenos, y los cavallos, al- 
gunos dellos, muy rrebueltos y corredores, danles tan buena 
mano, y alan9ean A su plazer, pues los q estavamos pelean- 
do desq los vimos, nos dimos tanta priesa, q los de a cavallo 
i por vna parte y nosotros por otra, de presto bolbieron las es- 
i paldas, E aqui Creyeron los yndios que cavallo y El caballe- 
i ro Era todo vno, como jamas avian visto cavallos, y van Aque- 
Uas §avanas y canpos llenos dellos, y Acojieronse a vnos es- 
pesos montes que alii avia, y desque los ovimos desbaratado, 
Cortes nos conto como no avian podido venir mas presto, 
por amor de vna gienega, y Como Estubo peleando con otros 
Esquadrones de guerreros, antes q A nosotros Uegasen, y ve- 
nian tres de los caballeros de a cavallo heridos E ginco cava- 
llos, y despues de apeados debajo de vnos arboles y casas 
q alii Estavan, dimos muchas gragias a dios, por avernos da- 
do Aquella vitoria tan cunplida y como Era dia de nra se- 
fiora de margo, Uamose vna villa q se poblo El tienpo an- 



94 

dando, santa maria de la vitoria, Ansi por ser dia de nra se- 
nora como por la gran vitoria q tuvimos, aquesta fue la pri- 
mera guerra q tuvimos En conpania de cortes En la nueva 
espana, y esto pasado apretamos las heridas a los heridos con 
paiios, q otra Cosa no avia, y se curaron los Cavallos, Con 
qmalles las heridas con vnto de vn yndio de los muertos que 
abrimos para sacarle el vnto y fuymos a ver los muertos que 
avia por El canpo, y Eran mas de ochoyientos, y todos los 
mas destocadas, y otros de los tiros, y Escopetas y vallestas 
y muchos Estavan medio muertos, y tendidos pues donde an- 
duvieron los de a cavallo avia buen rrecavdo dellos muertos 
y otros qxandose de las heridas, Estuvimos En esta vatalla 
sobre vna ora que no les pudimos hazer perder punto de bue- 
nos guerreros, hasta q vinieron los de a cavallo y prendimos 
§inco yndios y los dos dellos capitanes, y como Era tarde y 
hartos de pelear y no aviamos Comido, nos bolvimos al rreal, 
y luego Enterramos dos soldados que yvan heridos por la 
garganta, y otro por el oydo y quemamos las heridas a los 
demas y a los cavallos con el vnto del yndio, y pusimos bue- 
nas velas y Escuchas, y §enamos, y rreposamos. Aqui Es 
donde dize fran§isco lopez de gomara, que salio fran^isco de 
morla En vn caballo rru§io, picado, antes q llegase Cortes 
con los de cavallo, y que Eran los santos Apostoles sefior 
Santiago, o sefior san pedro, digo que todas nras obras y vi- 
torias son por mano de nro sefior Jesuxpo y q En aquella 
batalla avia para cada vno de nosotros tantos yndios, que a 
pufiados de tierra nos §egaran, salvo que la gran misericor- 
dia de nro sefior En todo nos ayudaba y pudiera ser q los 
que dize el gomara, fueran los gloriosos Apostoles sefior San- 
tiago, o sefior san pedro E yo como pecador, no fuese dino 
de lo ver lo que yo enton§es vi y conosgi fue a fran^ de mor- 
la En vn cavallo castafio, que venia juntamente con cortes, 
que me pares§e q Agora q lo estoy Escriviendo se me rre- 
presenta, por estos ojos pecadores, toda la guerra, segund y 
de la manera q alii pasamos. E ya que yo como yndino, no 
fuera mere§edor de ver A qualquiera de aqllos gloriosos 
apostoles, alii En nra conpafiia Abia sobre quatro§ientos sol- 



96 

dados, y cortes y otros muchos cavalleros, platicarase dello, 
y se tomara por testimonio, y se oviera hecho vna yglesia 
quando se poblo la villa, y se nonbrara la villa de Santiago 
de la vitoria, o de san pedro de la vitoria, Como se nonbro 
santa maria de la vitoria y si fuera Ansi Como dize El go- 
mara harto malos cristianos fueramos, q Enbiandonos nro 
senor dios, sus santos Apostoles, no rrecono^er la gran md. 
q nos hazia, y rreveren§iar cada dia Aqlla yglesia, y plu- 
guiera a dios q Ansi fuera, como El coronista dize, y hasta 
que ley su coronica nunca Entre Conquistadores q alii se 
hallaron, tal les oy y dexemoslo aqui y dire lo q mas pa- 
samos. 



CAPITULO XXXIVl [XXXV] como enbio 
Cortes a Uamar todos los caciques de aque- 
Uas provinqias y lo que sobrello se hizo. 

ya E dicho §omo prendimos En aquella batalla, §inco yn- 
dios y los dos dellos capitanes, con los cuales estubo aguilar, 
la lengua, a platicas, y conosgio En lo q le dixeron, que se- 
rian honbres para enbiar por mensageros, y dixolo al capi- 
tan cortes que los soltasen, y que fuesen a hablar a los caci- 
ques de aquel pueblo, E otros qualesquier que pudiesen ver 
E aquellos dos yndios mensageros se les dio cuentas verdes 
E diamantes azules, y les dixo Aguilar muchas palabras bien 
sabrosas y de alagos, y que les qremos tener por hermanos, 
y que no oviesen miedo, y que lo pasado de aquella guerra 
q EUos tenian la culpa, y que Uamasen a todos los Cagiques 
de todos los pueblos q les queremos hablar y se les amones- 
. to otras muchas Cosas bien mansamente para atraellos de 
paz y fueron de buena voluntad, y hablaron con los prin^i- 
pales y cagiques, y les dixeron todo lo que le enbiamos a ha- 
zer saber sobre la paz E oyda nra Enbajada, fue Entre Ellos 
aCordado de enbiar luego quinze yndios de los Esclavos que 



96 

Entre Ellos tenian y todos entiznadas las caras, y las man- 
tas y bragueroB que trayan muy rruines y con ellos Enbia- 
ron gallinas y pescado asado, pan de mayz, y llegados de- 
lante de cortes los rre^ibio de buena voluntad, y aguilar, la 
lengua, les dixo, medio Enojado, que Como venian de aqlla 
manera puestas las caras q mas venian de guerra, q para tratar 
pazes, y q luego fuesen a los ca§iques y les dixesen q si qrian 
paz como se la ofre§imos, que viniesen senores a tratar della, 
como se vsa E no Enbien Esclavos. Aquellos mismos Entiz- 
nados se les hizo §iertos Alagos y se Enbio Con ellos Cuentas 
Azules, En sefial de paz, y para ablandalles los pensamien- 
tos y luego otro dia vinieron treynta yndios pringipales y 
con buenas mantas, y truxeron gallinas y pescado y fruta, E 
pan de maiz, y demandaron licen§ia a cortes para qmar y 
Enterrar los cuerpos de los muertos En las batallas pasadas, 
porq no oliesen mal o los comiesen tigres o leones, la qual 
ligen^ia les dio luego y ellos se dieron priesa en traer mucha 
geiite para los Enterrar y qmar los Cuerpos a su vsanza, y 
segun cortes supo dellos dixeron q les faltava sobre ocho- 
§ientos honbres, sin los q estavan heridos E dixeron q no se 
podian detener Con nosotros En palabras ni pazes, porq otro 
dia avian de venir todos los prin§ipales y senores de todos 
aquellos pueblos y con§ertarian las pazes, y como cortes En 
todo Era muy avisado, nos dixo rriendo a los soldados q alii 
nos hallamos teniendole conpafiia sabeys senores q me pa- 
res^e questos yndios temeran mucho a los cavallos, y deven 
de pensar q Ellos solos hazen la guerra y ansi mismo las lon- 
bardas E pensado vna cosa para que mejor lo crean, que tray- 
gan la yegua de joan sedefio, que pario El otro dia En el 
navio, y Atalla An Aqui adonde yo estoy, y traygan el ca- 
vallo de ortiz El musico ques muy rrijioso y tomara olor 
de la yegua, y desque aya tomado olor della llevaran la ye- 
gua E El cavallo cada vno por si En parte donde desque 
vengan los Ca§iques que an de venir, no los oyan rrelinchar 
ni los vean hasta que vengan delante de mi y estemos ha- 
blando, y ansi se hizo segund y de la manera que lo mando, 
que truxeron la yegua- y el cavallo y tomo olor de ella, En 



97 

El aposento de cortes y dismas desto mando, que gebasen vn 
tiro El mayor con vna buena pelota y bien cargado de pol- 
vora, y Estando en Esto, q ya Era medio dia, vinieron qua- 
renta yndios, todos caciques, Con buena manera y mantas 
rricas a la vsanga de ellos, y saludaron A cortes, y a todos 
nosotros, y trayan de sus ynsiensos, andavan savmando a 
quantos alii Estavamos y demandaron perdon de lo pasado, 
y q desde alii adelante serian buenos. Cortes les rrespondio 
algo con gravedad como enojado y por nra lengua Aguilar 
dixo, q ya ellos avian visto quantas vezes les avia rrequeri- 
do Con la paz, y q ellos tenian la culpa, y que agoran Eran 
meres§edores q A Ellos y a quantos quedan En todos sus 
pueblos, matasemos y que somos vasallos de vn gran rrey y 
senor que nos Enbio A Estas partes, que se dize El enpera- 
dor don carlos, q manda que a los questuvieren en su rreal 
servigio, q les ayudemos y favorezcamos, y que si Ellos fue- 
ren buenos Como dizen q Ansi lo haremos y si no que sol- 
tara de Aquellos tepuzques que los raaten y al yerro Uaman 
En su lengua tepuzque, E avn por lo pasado que an hecho, 
En darnos gerra, Estan Enojados Algunos dellos. Enton§es, 
secretamente, mando poner fuego A la lonbarda qstava §e- 
bada y dio tan buen trueno Como Era menester yva la pe- 
lota zunbando por los montes, que como Era medio dia y 
hazia Calma, llevava gran rruydo, y los Cagiques se Espanta- 
ron de la oyr, como no avian visto cosa como aquella Creye- 
ron q Era verdad lo que Cortes les dixo, y Cortes les dixo, 
Con Aguilar, q ya no oviesen miedo, quel mando q no hi- 
ziesen dano, y En aquel ynstante truxeron El cavallo, que 
avia tomado olor de la yegua, y atanlo no muy lexos de don- 
de estava Cortes hablando con los Ca§iques, y como la ye- 
gua la avian tenido En El mismo aposento a donde Cortes y 
los yndios estavan ablando, pateaba El cavallo y rrelinchava 
y hazia bramuras, y sienpre los ojos mirando A los yndios, 
y al aposento a donde avia tomado olor de la yegua, y los 
Cagiques creyeron, que por ellos hazia Aquellas bramuras, y 
estavan espantados y desque Cortes los vio de aquel arte se 
levanto de la silla, y se fue para El cavallo, y mando a dos 

Bemal Dlai del CastiUo.— 14. 



mo90S despuelas, que luego le llevasen de alii lexos, y dixo 
a los yndios, q ya mando Al cavallo q no Estuviese Enoja- 
do, pues Ellos venian de paz y Eran buenos. Estando En 
Esto vinieron sobre treynta yndios, de los de carga, q Entre 
Ellos llaman tamemes, que trayan la comida de gallinas y 
pescado y otras cosas de frutas, que pares§e ser se quedaron 
atras, y no pudieron venir juntamente Con los Ca§iques y 
alii wo muchas platicas [de] Cortes con aquellos prin§ipales, 
y los ca§iques Con cortes y dixeron que otro dia vernian 
' todos y traerian vn presente y hablarian En otras cosas y 
ansi se fueron muy Contentos, donde los dexare agora, hasta 
otro dia — 



CAPITULO XXXVL Como vinieron todos 
los Caciques E calachonis del rrio de gri- 
jalba y truxeron vn presente, y lo que so- 
brello paso. 




TRO dia de manana, que fueron a quinze dias del 
mes de margo de mill e quinientos diez y nueve 
1" afios, vinieron muchos Cagiques y prin§ipales de 
Aquel pueblo de tavasco y de otros Comarcanos, haziendo 
mucho Acato a todos nosotros, y truxeron vn presente de 
oro, que fueron quatro diademas y vnas lagartijas, y dos co- 
mo perrillos y orejeras, y §inco Anades, y dos figuras de Ca- 
ras de yndios, y dos suelas de oro Como de sus Cotaras y otras 
cosillas de poco valor que ya no me Acuerdo q tan to balya y 
truxeron mantas de las que Ellos hazian q son muy bastas, 
porq ya abran oydo dezir los que tienen notigia de aquella 
provingia, que no las ay en aquella tierra sino de poca balya 
y no fue nada todo Este presente En conparagion de veynte 



99 

mugeres, y entre Ellas, vna muy Exijelente muger q se dixo 
dona marina, que ansi se Uamo despues de buelta cristiana 
y dexare esta plati'ca y de hablar della y de las demas mu- 
geres q truxeron y dire que Cortes rres^ibio aquel presente 
Con Alegria y se aparto con todos los Ca5iques y con agui- 
lar El ynterprete A hablar y les dixo que por aqllo q trayan 
se lo tenia En gra§ia mas q vna Cosa les rrogava q luego man- 
dasen poblar Aquel pueblo. Con toda su gente E mugeres, E 
hijos, y que dentro de dos dias le quiere ver poblado, y q En 
esto conos5era tener verdadera paz, y luego los Ca9iques man- 
daron llamar todos los vezinos y con sus hijos y mugeres. En 
dos dias se poblo, y lo otro q les mando q dexasen sus ydo- 
los y sacrifigios y rrespondieron q ansi lo harian y les decla- 
ramos con aguilar, lo mejor q Cortes pudo, las cosas tocan- 
tes a nra santa fee y como Eramos xpianos y adoravamos En 
vn solo dios verdadero, y se les mostro vna ymagen muy de- 
vota de nra senora, con su hijo pregioso En los bragos, y se 
les declaro que En aquella santa ymagen rreverengiamos, 
porq ansi Esta En el 5ielo y es madre de nro sefior dios, y 
los Caciques dixeron que les paresgia muy bien aqlla gran 
tele§iguata, y que se la diesen para tener en su pueblo, porq 
a las grandes senoras En aquella tierra, en su lengua, llaman 
teele§iguatas y dixo Cortes q si daria y les mando hazer vn 
buen altar, bien labrado, El qual luego hizieron y otro dia 
de mafiana mando Cortes a dos de nros carpinteros de lo 
bianco, que se dezian alonzo yanez y alvaro lopez, q luego 
labrasen vna cruz muy alta, y despues de aver mandado to- 
do esto, les dixo, q fue la cavsa q nos dieron guerra, tres ve- 
zes rrequiriendoles Con la paz, y rrespondieron que ya avian 
demandado perdon dello, y Estaban perdonados, y quel Ca- 
gique de Chanpoton, su hermano, se lo Aconsejo, y porque 
no le tuviesen por cobarde y porq se lo rrenian y desonrra- 
van, y porque no nos dio guerra quando la otra vez vino otro 
capitan Con quatro navios, y segun paresge dezialo por joan 
de grijalba y tanbien quel yndio que trayamos por lengua, 
q se huyo vna noche, se lo aconsejo, y que de dia y de noche 
nos diesen guerra, y luego cortes les mando q En todo Caso 



100 

se le truxesen, dixeron q Como les vio que En la batalla no 
les fue bien, que se les fue huyendo, y q no sabian del, y 
avnque le ban buscado, y supimos q le sacrificaron, pues tan 
Caro les costo sus Consejos, y mas les pregunto q de q parte 
trayan oro, y Aquellas Joyezuelas, rrespondieron q hazia 
donde se pone el sol y dezian Culua y mexico, y Como no 
sabiamos que Cosa Era mexico, ni Culua dexavamoslo pasar 
por alto, y alii trayamos otra lengua q se dezia frangisco, q 
ovimos quando lo de grijalba, ya otra vez por mi memorado, 
mas no Entendia poco ni mucho la de tabasco, sino la de 
Cuba ques la mexicana, y medio por senas dixo A Cortes, 
que Culua Era muy Adelante y nonbrava mexico y no le 
Entendimos, y En Esto geso la platica, hasta otro dia, que 
se puso En El Altar la santa ymagen de nra senora y la cruz, 
la qual todos adoramos y dixo misa El padre fray bartolome 
de olmedo, y Estavan todos los ca§iques y prin§ipales delante 
y pusose nonbre Aquel pueblo santa maria de la vitoria, y 
ansi se llama agora a la villa de tabasco y el mismo frayle 
con nra lengua Aguilar predico a las veynte yndias que nos 
presentaron muchas buenas cosas de nra santa fee y q no Cre- 
yesen En los ydolos q de antes creyan, que Eran malos, y 
no Eran dioses, ni mas les sacrificasen, que las trayan Enga- 
nadas y adorasen En nro senor jesuxpo, y luego se bavtiga- 
ron, y se puso por nonbre dona marina aquella yndia E se- 
nora que alii nos dieron y verdaderamente Era gran cagica, 
E hija de grandes Caciques y senora de vasallos, y bien se le 
pares§ia En su persona, lo qual dire Adelante, como y de que 
manera fue Alii trayda E A las otras mugeres no me Acuerdo 
bien de todas sus nonbres, y no haze Al caso, nonbrar Algu- 
. nas, mas Estas fueron las primeras cristianas que ovo En la 
,nueva Espafia, y cortes las rrepartio A cada capitan la suya, 
y a esta doiia marina, como Era de buen paresger, y Entre- 
metida y desEnbuelta dio alonso hernandez puerto carrero, 
q ya E dho otra vez q Era muy buen cavallero, primo del 
conde de medellin, y desque fue a castilla el puerto carrero 
estubo la doiia marina Con Cortes, E ovo alii yn hijo q se di- 
xo don martin cortes. En aquel pueblo Estuvimos ginco dias, 



101 

ansi porque se curavan las heridas, como por los questavan 
Con dolor de lomos, que alii se les quite, y demas desto, por- 
q cortes sienpre atraya Con buenas palabras a todos los ca§i- 
ques y les dixo Como El Enperador nro senor, Cuyos vasa- 
Uos somos, tiene A su mandar muchos grandes senores y 
ques bien que Ellos le den la obidien§ia, E que En lo que 
ovieren menester Ansi fabor de nosotros, o qualquiera cosa, 
que se lo hagan saber donde quiera que Estuviesemos, quel 
les verna Ayudar y todos los Cagiques les dieron muchas gra- 
5ias por ello y alii se otorgaron por vasallos de nro gran En- 
perador y estos fueron los primeros vasallos que En la nueva 
espafia dieron la obidienyia A su magestad y luego cortes les 
mando que para otro dia que Era domingo de rramos, muy 
de manana viniesen al altar con sus hijos y mugeres para que 
adorasen la santa ymagen de nra senora y la cruz, y ansi rais- 
mo les mando que viniesen luego seys indios carpinteros y 
q fuesen con nros carpinteros y que En el pueblo de §intla, 
adonde nro senor dios fue servido darnos aquella vitoria de 
la batalla pasada, por mi memorada, que hiziesen vna cruz 
En vn arbol grande que alii Estaba, a que entrellos llaman 
geyva, E hizieronla En aquel arbol A Efeto que durase mu- 
cho, que con la corteza, que suele rreberdeger Esta sienpre 
la cruz senalada hecho Esto mando que aparejasen todas las 
Canoas que tenian para nos Ayudar a Enbarcar, porque lue- 
go Aquel santo dia nos queriamos hazer A la bela, porque 
En aquella sazon vinieron dos pilotos A dezir A cortes, que 
Estavan En gran rriesgo los navios, por amor de El norte, 
ques travesia y otro dia muy de manana vinieron todos los 
cagiques y pringipales Con todas las canoas y sus mugeres E 
hijos y estavan ya En el patio, donde teniamos la yglesia 
E cruz y muchos rramos Cortados, para andar En pro§esion 
y desque los cagiques vimos juntos, ansi cortes y Capitanes y 
todos a vna, Con gran devogion Anduvimos vna muy debo- 
ta pro§esion, y El padre de la md. y joan diaz El clerigo, rre- 
vestidos, y se dixo misa y adoramos y besamos la santa cruz 
y los ea§iques E yndios mirandonos y hecha nra solene fies- 
ta, segund El tienpo, vinieron los prin§ipales y truxeron A 



cortes hasta diez gallinas, y pescado, y otras legunbres, y nos 
despedimos dellos y sienpre Cortes Encomendandoles la san- 
ta ymagen y santas Cruzes, y que las tuviesen muy linpias, 
y barridas, y Enrramado y que las rreberen^iasen y halla- 
rian salud y buenas sementeras, y despues de que Era ya tar- 
de nos Enbarcamos y otro dia lunes por la maiiana nos hi- 
zimos A la bela y Con buen viaje navegamos y fuymos la bia 
de san juan de olua, y sienpre muy juntos a tierra. E yendo 
navegando, con buen tienpo, deziamos a Cortes los q sabia- 
mos aqlla derrota, sefior Alii queda la rranbla, q En lengua 
de yndios se dize Ayagualulco y luego que llegamos En el 
paraje de tonala, que se dize santanton se lo senalabamos, mas 
Adelante, le mostravamos El gran rrio de gua§agualco y vio 
las muy altas sierras nevadas y luego las sierras de sant min. 
y mas adelante le mostramos la rroca partida, ques vnos gran- 
des penascos, q Entran En la mar, y tienen vna sefial arriba 
Como manera de silla y mas Adelante le mostramos El rrio 
de Alvarado, ques adonde Entro pedro de alvarado, quando 
lo de grijalva y luego vimos El rrio de vanderas, que fue don- 
de rrescatamos los diez y seis mill pesos, y luego le mostra- 
mos la ysla blanca, y tanbien le diximos a donde quedaba 
la ysla verde, y junto a tierra vio la ysla de sacrifiQios, don- 
de hallamos los Altares, quando lo de grijalva, y los yndios 
sacrificados y luego En buena ora llegamos a san juan de 
ulua, jueves de la §ena, despues de medio dia, y Acuerdome 
que se llego vn caballero, que se dezia Alonzo hernandez 
puerto Carrero, E dixo A cortes, paresgeme sefior, que os an 
venido diziendo Estos cavalleros, que an venido otras dos ve- 
zes a estas tierras, cata frangia montesinos, cata paris, la gib- 
dad, cata, las aguas de duero, do van A dar En la mar, yo 
digo que mire las tierras rricas, y sabeos bien gobernar lue- 
go cortes bien Entendio A que fin fueron Aquellas palabras 
dhas y rrespondio, denos dios ventura En armas, como al 
paladin rroldan, que en lo demas teniendo a v. m. y a otros 
Cavalleros por senores, bien me sabre Entender, y dexemos- 
lo y no pasemos de aqui y esto es lo que paso, y cortes no 
Entro En el rrio de albarado como lo dice gomara. 



103 



CAPITULO XXXVIL Como dona marina 
Era Cai^ica, K hija de grandes senores, j 
senora de pueblos y vasallos y de la ma- 
nera, que fue trayda A tavasco — 

antes que mas meta la mano, En lo del gran montezuma, y 
su gran mexico y mexicanos, quiero dezir lo de dofia mari- 
na, Como desde su ninez, fue gran senora y cagica de pue- 
blos y vasallos, y es desta manera, que su padre y madre 
Eran senores y cagiques de vn pueblo que se dize paynala, 
y tenia otros pueblos subjetos a el obra de ocho leguas de la 
villa de gua§aqualco, y murio El padre quedando muy ni- 
na, y la madre se Caso eon otro Cagique mangebo, y ovieron 
vn hijo, y segund paresgio, querianlo bien al hijo, que avian 
avido acordaron Entre El padre y la madre de dalle el ca§i- 
cazgo despues de sus dias, y porque En ello no oviese Estor- 
vo, dieron de noche a la nifia, dona marina, a vnos yndios 
de xicalango, porq no fuese vista, y hecharon fama que se 
avia muerto, y En aquella sazon murio vna hija de vna yn- 
dia Esclava suya y publicaron que Era la heredera por ma- 
nera que los de xicalango la dieron A los de tabasco, y los 
de tabasco a cortes, y conosgi A su madre y a su hermano de 
madre, yjo de la bieja, que Era ya honbre y mandava jun- 
tam^ Con la madre a su pueblo, por quel marido postre- 
ro de la vieja ya Era falles§ido, y despues de bueltos xpianos 
se llamo la vieja marta y El yjo lazaro y esto selo muy bien, 
porque En el ano de mill E qui^s y veynte y tres aiios, des- 
pues de conquistado mexico, y otras provin§ias y se avia Al- 
gado xpoval de oli. En las higueras, fue cortes Alii y paso 
por guayaqualco, fuymos con el aquel viaje toda la mayor 
parte de los vezinos de aquella villa, como dire En su tienpo 
y lugar y como dona marina En todas las guerras de la nue- 
va espana, y tascala y mexico, fue tan Egelente muger y 



104 

buena lengua, Como adelante dire, A esta cavsa la traya 
sienpre Cortes Consigo, y En aquella sazon y viaje se caso 
con ella vn hidalgo que se dezia juan xaramillo, En un pue- 
blo que se dezia ori^aba, delante §iertos testigos, que vno 
dellos se dezia Aranda vezino q fue de tavasco, y aquel conta- 
va El casamiento y no como lo dize El coronista gomara, y la 
dona marina tenia mucho ser y mandava Asolutamente entre 
los yndios En toda la nueva espana, y estando Cortes En la 
villa de guagaqualco, Enbio a llamar A todos los Cagiques de 
aquella provin^ia para hazerles vn parlamento A9erca de la 
santa dotrina, y sobre su buen tratamiento y Enton§es vino 
la madre de dona marina y su hermano de madre lazaro, 
con otros cagiques dias a via que me avia dho la dona mari- 
na, que Era de aquella provin§ia, y senora de vasallos, y 
bien lo sabia El Capitan Cortes y aguilar la lengua, por ma- 
nera que vino la madre E su hijo y el hermano y se conos- 
§ieron, que claramente Era su hija, porque se le pares§ia mu- 
cho, tuvieron miedo della, que creyeron que los enbiava 
allar para matallos, y lloravan, y como ansi los vio Uorar la 
dona marina, les Consolo y dixo, que no oviesen miedo, que 
quando la traspusieron con los de xicalango, que no supie- 
ron lo que hazian, y se lo perdonava y les dio muchas jbyas 
de oro y rropa, y q se volviesen a su pueblo y que dios la 
avia hecho mucha md En quitarla de adorar ydolos agora y 
.ser xpiana, y tener vn hijo de su amo y senor Cortes, y ser 
•Casada con vn cavallero, Como Era su marido, joan xara- 
• millo, que avnque la hizieran Cagica de todas quantas pro- 
vingias avia En la nueva espafia no lo seria, que En mas 
tenia servir A su marido E a cortes, que quanto En el mun- 
do ay, y todo Esto que digo, selo yo muy §ertificadamen- 
te ^ y esto me paresge que quiere rremedar lo que le acaesgio 
con sus hermanos En exito a josep que vinieron en su poder, 
quando lo del trigo. Esto es lo que paso, y no la rrela^ion 
que dieron al gomara, y tanbien dize otras cosas que dexo 
por alto E bolbiendo a nra materia Dona marina sabia la 

1 Teatado en el original: **y lo juro." 



105 

lengua de.gua^aqualco, ques la propia de mexico, y sabia la 
de tabasco Como jeronimo de aguilar sabia la de yucatan y 
tabasco ques toda vna, Entendianse bien y El aguilar lo de- 
clarava En castilla a cortes fue gran prin§ipio para nra Con- 
quista y ansi se nos hazian todas las Cosas, loado sea dios 
muy prosperamente, E querido declarar Esto porque sin yr 
dofia marina, no podiamos Entender la lengua de la nueva 
espafia y mezico donde lo dexare y bolvere a dezir Como 
nos desEnbarcamos En el puerto de san juan de vlua. 



CAPITULO XXXVIIL Como llegamos con 
todos los navios a san juan de vlua y lo 
que alii pasamos. 




iN jueves santo de la §ena, de mill E quinientos y 
diez y nueve anos llegamos con toda la Armada a 
el puerto de san juan de vlua, y como El piloto 
alaminos lo sabia muy bien desde quando venimos Con juan 
de grijalva, luego mando surgir En parte que los navios es- 
tuviesen seguros del norte, y pusieron En la nao Capitana 
sus estandartes rreales y beletas y dende obra de media ora 
que obimos surgido vinieron dos Canoas muy grandes, que 
En aquellas partes, a las canoas grandes, Uaman piraguas y 
en Ellas biniero muchos yndios mexicanos, y como vieron 
los Estandartes y El navio grande conos5ieron que alii avian 
de yr a hablar Al capitan y fueronse derechos al nabio y 
entran dentro y preguntan qual Era El tatuan que en su 
lengua dizen El senor y dona marina que bien lo Entendio, 
porque sabia muy bien la lengua, se le mostro a Cortes y los 
yndios hizieron mucho acato a cortes, A su vsan§a y le di- 
xeron que fuese bien venido, E que vn criado del gran mon- 

Ber nal Dlas del CastiUo.— 15. 



106 

tezuma, su sefior, les Enbiava A saber q honbres eramos, E 
que buscavamos E que si algo oviesemos menester para nos- 
otros y los navios que se lo dixesemos, que traeran rrecavdo 
para ello, y cortes rrespondio, con las dos lenguas Aguilar y 
dofia marina, q se lo tenia en md, y luego les mando dar de 
Comer, y bever vino, y vnas cuentas azules, y desque ovie- 
ron bevido les dixo que veniamos para bellos y contratar y 
que no se les haria Enojo ninguno E que oviesen por buena 
nra llegada aquella tierra y los mensageros se bolbieron muy 
Contentos y otro dia, que fue viernes santo de la cruz, des- 
Enbarcamos Ansi cavallos como Artilleria, En vnos monto- 
nes E medanos de arena q alii ay altos, que no avia trra lia- 
na, sino todos arenales, y asestaron los tiros como mejor le 
pares§io Al artillero, q se dezia mesa, y hezimos vn altar a 
donde se dixo luego misa, E hizieron cho§as y rramadas, pa- 
ra Cortes y pa los capitanes, y entre tres§ientos soldados Aca- 
rreavamos madera E hezimos nras cho^as y los cavallos se 
pusieron A donde Estuviesen seguros, y En esto se paso aquel 
viernes santo, y otro d^^ sabado bispera de pasqua de la san- 
ta rresurre§ion, vinieron muchos yndios, que Enbio vn prin- 
§ipal, que Era governador de montezuma, que se dezia pi- 
talpitoque que despues le Uamamos obandillo, y truxeron 
hachas y adobaron las cho§as del capitan cortes y los rran- 
chos que mas §erca hallaron, y les pusieron mantas grandes 
En§ima por amor de El sol, que Era quaresma E hazia muy 
gran Calor y truxeron gallinas y pan de maiz y cirhuelas, q 
Era tienpo dellas, y pares§eme q Entonges trujeron vnas jo- 
yas de oro, y todo lo presentaron A cortes E dixeron que 
otro dia avia de venir vn governador a traer mas bastimen- 
to. Cortes se lo Agrades§io mucho, y les mando dar ^iertas 
cosas de rresCate con que fueron muy contentos y otro dia 
pasqua santa de rresurre§ion, vino El governador que avian 
dho, que se dezia tendile: onbre de nego§ios E truxo con el 
a pitalpitoque, que tanbien Era persona Entrellos principal 
y trayan detras de si muchos yndios con presentes y galli- 
nas y otras legunbres, y a estos que lo trayan mando tendile 
que se apartasen vn poco a vn cabo, y con mucha vmilldad 



107 

hizo tres reverengias A cortes A su V8an5a* y despues a todos 
los soldados que mas gercanos nos hallamos, y cortes les di- 
jo, Con las lenguas, que fuesen bien venidos y les Abra§o y 
les dixo q esperasen y que luego les hablaria, y Entre tanto 
mando hazer vn altar lo mejor que en Aql tienpo se pudo 
hazer y dixo mlsa Cantada fray bartolome de olmedo que 
Era gran Cantor y la benefi9iava El padre joan diaz^ y estu- 
vieron A la misa los dos governadores y otros prinjipales de 
los que trayan En su Conpania y oydo misa comio cortes y 
giertos Capitanes y los dos yndios criados del gran montezu- 
ma, y al^adas las mesas, se apartaron cortes con las dos len- 
guas y con Aquellos Cagiques y les dixo Como Eramos xpia- 
nos y vasallos del mayor senor que ay En el mundo que se 
dize El enperador don carlos E que tiene por vasallos y cria- 
dos A muchos grandes senores, E que por su mandado veni- 
mos Aquestas tierras, porq A muchos Anos que tiene notisia 
dellos, y del gran senor q les manda, y q le quiere tener por 
amigo y dezille muchas Cosas En su rreal nonbre y desq las 
Bepa E aya Entendido, se olgara, y tanbien para Contratar con 
El E sus yndios e vasallos de buena Amistad y que querria 
saber donde manda su md. q se vean, y El tendile rrespon- 
dio algo sobervio, y dixo, avn agora As Uegado E ya le quie- 
res hablar, rres§ibe Agora Este presente q te damos en non- 
bre de nro senor, y despues me diras lo que te Cunpliere, y 
luego saco de vna petaca ques Como caxa muchas pie§as de 
oro y de buenas labores E rricas, y mando traer diez Cargas 
de rropa blanca de algodon y de pluma, Cosas muy de ver y 
otras Cosas q ya no me acuerdo y mucha comida q Eran ga- 
Uinas fruta, y pescado asado. Cortes lo rresgibio rriendo y 
Con buena gra§ia, y les dio Cuentas tor§idas y otras cuen- 
tezuelas de las de castilla y les rrogo, q mandasen En sus 
pueblos, q viniesen a Contratar con nosotros, porquel traya 
muchas cuentas a trocar por oro, y dixeron que ansi lo man- 



1 Testado en el original: "y con braseros de barro con asquas traia mucho 
yncienao." 

2 Tachado en el original: "y otroB soldados que leayudavan.'' 

I 



108 

darian, y segund despues supimos estos tendile y pitalpito- 
que, Eran governadores de vnas provin§ias que se dizen co- 
tustan, e tustepeque, E guazpaltepeque y tatalteco, y de otros 
pueblos que nuevamente tenian sojuzgados, y luego Cortes 
mando traer vna silla de cadera con Entalladuras de taracea 
y vnas piedras margaritas que tienen dentro de si muchas 
labores y enbueltas En vnos algodones q tenian almisqle, 
porque oliesen bien E vn sartal de diamantes torgidos y vna 
gorra de carmesi, Con vna medalla de oro de san jorge, co- 
mo que estava a cavallo con su langa que mata vn dragon, 
y dixo a tendile, que luego enbiase aquella silla En que se 
asiente El sefior montezuma, que ya sabiamos q ansi se Ua- 
mava, para quando le vaya a ver y hablar, y que aquella go- 
rra que la ponga en la cabega e que aquella piedra, y todo lo 
demas le manda dar El rrey nro sefior En senal de amistad, 
porque sabe ques gran sefior E que mande sefialar para que 
dia y En que parte quiere que le vaya a ver y El tendile lo 
rres§ibio y dixo, que su sefior montezuma, Es tan gran se- 
fior que holgara de conosQer A nro gran rrey, y que lo Ueba^ 
ra presto aquel presente y traera rrespuesta y pares§e ser El 
tendile traya Consigo grandes pintores, que los ay tales En 
mexico, y mando pintar al natural, la cara y rrostro E cuer- 
po y fayQiones de cortes y de todos los capitanes y soldados 
y navios, y belas y cavallos y a dofia marina E aguilar y has- 
ta dos lebreles, E tiros y pelotas y todo El Exer§ito que tra- 
yamos y lo Uevo a su sefior y luego mando cortes A los arti- 
lleros, que tuviesen muy bien gebadas las lonbardafi. Con 
buen golpe de polvora, para que hiziese gran trueno, quan- 
do lo soltaaen, y mando A pedro de alvarado, quel y todos 
los de A Cavallo, se aparejasen para q aquellos criados de 
montezuma, los viesen correr, y que llevasen pretales de cax- 
caveles, y tanbien Cortes cavalgo y dixo, si En estos meda- 
nos de arena pudieramos correr, bueno fuera, mas ya veran 
que a pie atollamos En el arena salgamos A la playa desque 
sea menguante, y correremos de dos En dos, E al pedro de 
alvarado que era su yegua alazana, de gran Carrera y rre- 
buelta, le dio El cargo de todos los de a cavallo todo lo qual 



109 

86 hizo, delante de aquellos dos Enbajadores, y para que vie- 
sen salir los tiros, hizo cortes que los qria tornar A hablar, 
Con otros muchos prin^ipales y ponen fuego a las lonbardas, 
y En aquella sazon hazia Calma, y van las piedras por los 
montes rretunbando Con gran rruydo, y los governadores y 
todos los yndios, se espantaron de Cosas tan nuevas para 
Ellos, y todo lo mandaron pintar a sus pintores para que su 
sefior montezuma, lo viese y pareaje ser vn soldado tenia 
vn caxco medio dorado, y avnque mohoso, E biole tendile, 
que Era mas entremetido yndio quel otro, y dixo que le que- 
ria ver, que paresgia a vno q Ellos tenian, que les avian de- 
xado sus antepasados E linage donde venian, lo qual tenian 
puesto a sus dioses huychilobos, E que su senor montezuma 
86 holgaria de lo ver y luego se lo dieron y les dixo Cortes, 
que porq queria saber si El oro desta tierra es como lo que 
sacan en la nra de los rrios, que le Enbien aquel caxco lleno 
de granos de oro para enbiallo a nro gran Enperador y des- 
pues de todo Esto El tendile se despidio de cortes y de todos 
nosotros, y despues de muchos ofresyimientos q le hizo Cor- 
tes se despidio del y dixo quel bolveria Con la rrepuesta, con 
toda brevedad, E ya ydo tendile Alcangamos A saber, q des- 
pues de ser yndio de grandes neg05ios, fue El mas suelto peon 
que su amo montezuma tenia. El qual fue En posta y dio 
rrela§ion de todo a su seiior y le mostro todo El debujo, que 
Uebo pintado, y El presente que le Enbio Cortes E dizque 
.El gran montezuma, desque lo vio, quedo admirado y rresgi- 
, bio por otra parte mucho contento, y desque vio el caxCo 
.y El que tenia su huychilobos, tuvo por gierto, que Eramos 
. de los que le avian dho sus antepasados, q vernian A sefio- 
rear aquella tierra. ||Aqui Es donde dize El coronista goma- 
ra muchas cosas, que no le dieron buena rrelagion y dexallo, 
E dire lo que mas Acaes§io. 



110 



CAPITULO XXXVIII [XXXIX] Como fue 
tendile A hablar A su senor montezuma, 
y llevar El presente y lo q se hizo En nro 
rreal — 

desque fue tendile Con el presente quel capitan cortes le dio 
para su senor montezuma, E avia quedado En nro rreal el 
otro governador que se dezia pitalpitoque qdo En vnas cho- 
jas apartadas de nosotros y alii truxeron yndias para que 
hiziesen pan de su mayz, y gallinas y fruta y pescado, y de 
aquello px'oveyan a cortes, y a los capitanes que comian Con 
el, que a nosotros los soldados si no lo mariscavamos, o yva- 
mos a pescar, no lo teniamos, y En aquella sazon vinieron 
muchos yndios de los pueblos por mi nonbrados, donde Eran 
governadores aquellos criados del gran montezuma, y trayan 
algunos dellos oro y joy as de poco valor y gallinas, a trocar 
por nros rrescates que Eran Cuentas verdes y diamantes, y 
otras joyas y con aquello nos sustentavamos, porque comun- 
mente todos los soldados trayamos rrescate, como teniamos 
aviso quando lo de grijalva que Era bueno traer cuentas y 
En esto se pasaron seys o siete dias, y estando En Esto vino 
tendile vna manana con mas de ^ien yndios cargados, y ve- 
nia Con ellos vn gran ca§ique mexicano, y En el rrostro y 
fay§iones y cuerpo se paresgia al capitan cortes y adrede le 
Enbio El gran montezuma, porq segun dixeron, que quan- 
do a cortes le llebo tendile dibujado, su misma figura, todos 
los pringipales questavan con montezuma, dixeron que vn 
principal q se dezia quintalbor se le pares^ia a lo propio [&] 
Cortes, que ansi se Uamava aql gran ca§ique q venia con ten- 
dile, y como paresgia a cortes, ansi le Uamabamos en el rreal, 
cortes aca, cortes acuUa, bolvamos a su venida y lo que hi- 
zieron, que En llegando donde nro Capitan Estava, beso la 
tierra, y con braseros, que trayan de barro, y en ellos de su 



Ill 

yncen^io, le saumaron y a todos los demas soldados que alii 
gerca nos allamos y cortes les mostro mucho amor, y asen- 
tolos cabe si E aquel prin§ipal que venia con aquel presente 
traya Cargo dehablarjuntamente Con El tendile, ya E dho 
q 86 dezia quintalbor, y despues de aver dado El parabien 
venido aquella tierra, y otras muchas platicas que pasaron, 
mando sacar El presente que trayan, y Engima de las este- 
ras, que llaman petates y tendidas otras mantas de algodon 
en§ima dellas y lo primero que dio fue vna rueda de hechu- 
ra de sol de oro muy fino, q seria tamana Como vna rrueda 
de carreta, con muchas maneras de pinturas, gran obra de 
mirar, que valia a lo que despues dixeron que la avian pe- 
sado, sobre diez mill pesos, y otra mayor rrueda de plata, fi- 
gurada la luna y con muchos rresplandores y otras figuras 
En ella, y esta Era de gran peso, que valia mucho y truxo El 
caxco Ueno de oro en granos chicos, como le sacan de las 
minas, que valia tres mill pesos. Aquel oro del caxco tuvi- 
mos En mas, por saber §ierto que avia buenas minas, que si 
truxeran veynte mill pesos mas traxo veynte anades de oro 
muy prima labor y muy al natural, E vnos como perros, de 
los que Entrellos tienen y muchas pie^as de oro de tigres y 
leones, y monos, y diez collares, hechos de vna hechura muy 
prima, E otros pinjantes y doze flechas, y vn arco con su 
Cuerda, y dos varas como de justi5ia, de largor de ginco pal- 
mos, y todo Esto que he dho, de oro muy fino, y de obra va- 
ziadiza, y luego mando traer penachos de oro y de rricas 
plumas verdes, E otras de plata, y aventadores de lo mismo, 
pues benados de oro, sacados de vaziadizo, e fueron tantas 
cosas que Como A ya tantos anos q paso, no me acuerdo de 
todo, y luego mando traer alii sobre treynta cargas de rropa 
de algodon, tan prima y de muchos generos de labores, y de 
pluma de muchos colores, que por ser tantas, no quiero En 
ello meter mas la pluma porq no lo sabre escrebir y desq lo 
ovo dado, dixo aquel gran Cagique quintalbor y El tendile, 
A cortes que rresgiba aquello con la gran voluntad, que su 
sefior se lo Enbia E que lo rreparta con los tevles E onbres 
que consigo trae y cortes con Alegria lo rresgibio,5y dixeron 



112 

A Cortes aquellos enbaxadores, que Je querian hablar lo q su 
sefior le Enbia A dezir, y lo primero que le dixeron que se 
a holgado, que onbres tan Esfor§ados vengan a su tierra, 
Como le an dho que somos, porque sabia lo de tavasco y que 
deseara mucho ver a nro gran Enperador, pues tan gran 
sefior Es, pues de tan lexos tierras como venimos tiene noti- 
gia del E que le Enbiara vn presente, de piedras rricas, E 
que Entre tanto, que alii En aquel puerto estuvieremos, •si 
En algo nos puede servir que lo hara de buena voluntad E 
quanto a las vistas, que no Curasen dellas, que no a^f ia para 
que, poniendo muchos ynconvenientes, cortes les torno a dar 
las gra§ias, con buen senblante, por ello, y con muchos ala- 
gos y ofres§imientos, dio A cada governador dos camisas de 
olanda, y diamantes azules, y otras cosillas, y les rrogo que 
bolviesen por su Enbajador A mexico A dezir A su sefior, 
El gran montezuma, q pues aviamos pasado tantas mares y 
veniamos de tan lejos tierras, solamente por le ver y hablar 
de su persona A la suya, que si ansi se bolviese, que no le 
rresgibiria de buena manera nro gran rrey y sefior, E que a 
donde quiera questuviera, le quiere yr a ver y hazer lo que 
mandare, y los governadores dixeron que Ellos yrian y se lo 
dirian, mas que las vistas, que dize, que Entienden que son 
por demas, y Enbio cortes con aquellos mensajeros a monte- 
zuma, de la pobreza que trayamos, que Era vna copa de vi- 
drio, de floren§ia labrada y dorada, con muchas arboledas y 
monterias questavan En la copa, y tres camisas de olanda 
y otras cosas, y les Encomendo la rrespuesta, y fueronse Estos 
dos governadores, y quedo En el rreal pitalpitoque, que pa- 
resfe ser, le dieron cargo los demas criados de montezuma 
para que truxese la comida, de los pueblos mas §ercanos y 
dexallo E aqui y dire lo que en nro rreal paso. 



118 



CAPITULO XL. Como Cortes Enbio A bus- 
car otro puerto y asiento para poblar, y lo 
que sobrello se hizo 

despachados los mensajeros para mexico luego Cortes man- 
do yr dos navios a descubrir la costa adelante, y por Capitan 
dellos a frangisco de montejo, y le mando que siguiese El via- 
je que aviamos llevado con juan de grijalba, porquel mis- 
mo montejo avia venido En nra conpafiia como otra vez E 
dho, y que procurase de buscar puerto seguro, y mirase por 
tierras En q pudiesemos estar porque ya bien via, que en 
aquellos Arenales no nos podiamos valer de mosquitos, y es- 
tar tan lexos de poblazones, y mando al piloto alaminos y a 
jvan alvarez El manquillo fuesen por pilotos, porque como 
ya sabian Aquella derrota, y que diez dias navegasen costa 
A costa, todo lo que pudiesen, y fueron de la manera que les 
fue mandado y llegaron En el parage del rrio grande ques 
{erca de panuco y desde alii adelante no pudieron pasar por 
las grandes corrientes, que fue el rrio donde la otra vez lle- 
gamos quando lo del capitan juan de grijalva, y viendo aque- 
lla mala navega§ion, dio la vuelta a san juan de vlua, sin 
mas pasar adelante, ni otra rrelagion Egebto que doze leguas 
de alii, avian visto vn pueblo, como puerto En fortaleza el 
qual pueblo se llamava quiahuyztlan, y que §erca de aquel 
pueblo Estava vn puerto, que le pares§ia Al piloto, que po- 
drian Estar los navios seguros del norte, pusole vn nonbre 
feo, ques El tal de bernal, que paresge A otro puerto despa- 
na, que tenia aquel nonbre, y En estas ydas y venidas, se 
pasaron al montejo diez o doze dias, bolvere a dezir que el 
yndio pitalpitoque, que quedaba para traer comida, afloxo 
de tal manera, que no traya ninguna Cosa al rreal, y tenia- 
mos gran falta de mantenimientos, porq ya el ca^abi Amar- 
gava de mohoso y podrido y suzio, de fatulas y si no yba- 
mos a mariscar, no comiamos y los yndios que solian traer 

Bernal Dias del Caetillo.— 16. 



114 

oro y gallinas A rrescatar ya no venian tantos Como al prin- 
§ipio, y esos q acudian muy rrecatados E medrosos y estava- 
mos Aguardando los mensageros que fueron A mexico, por 
oras y estando desta manera, buelven tendile Con muchos 
yndios y despues de aver hecho El Acato, que suelen Entre 
Ellos de savmar a cortes y a todos nosotros, dio diez cargas 
de mantas de pluma muy fina y rricas y quatro chalchihuys 
q son vnas piedras verdes muy de gran valor, y tenidas en- 
tre Ellos mas que nosotros las Esmeraldag, y es color verde, 
y ^iertas piegas de oro que dixeron, que valia El oro, sin los 
chalchivis, tres mill pesos, y Entonces vinieron El tendile 
y pitalpitoque, porquel otro gran ca§ique, que se dezia quin- 
talvor no bolvio porque avia adoles§ido En el camino, y 
aquellos dos governadores se apartaron con Cortes y dofia 
marina, y aguilar y le dixeron q su senor montezuma, rres- 
§ibio El presente, E que se holgo con el, E que En cuanto 
a las vistas que no le hablen mas sobrello y que Aquellas 
rricas piedras de chalchivis, que las Enbia para El gran En- 
perador y porq son tan rricas, q vale cada vna del las vna 
gran carga de oro, y que En mas Estima las tenia, y que ya 
no cure de Enbiar mas mensageros A mexico, y cortes les 
dio las gragias con ofres§imientos, y giertamente que le peso 
que tan claramente le dezian, que no podriamos ver Al mon- 
tezuma, y dixo a §iertos soldados, que alii nos hallamos, 
verdaderamente deve ser gran sefior y rrico, y si dios quisie- 
re Algun dia le Emos de yr a ver, y rrespondimos los solda- 
dos, ya qrriamos estar Enbueltos Con el, y dexemos por ago- 
ra las vistas, y digamos, q En aquella sazon era ora del ave 
maria, y en el rreal tafiiamos vna canpana, y todos nos arro- 
dillamos, delante de vna cruz que teniamos puesta En vn 
medano de arena y delante de aquella cruz deziamos la ora- 
gion del ave maria y Como tendile y pitalpitoque nos vieron 
ansi arrodillados, como Eran muy Entendidos, preguntaron 
q A que fin nos vmillavamos delante de aquel palo hecho de 
aquella manera y como Cortes lo oyo y El frayle de la md 
estava presente le dixo al frayle, bien es agora padre que ay 
buena materia para ello, que les demos a Entender, con nras 



118 

lenguas, las Cosas tocantes a nra santa fee, y Entonges se les 
hizo vn tan buen rrazonamiento, para En tal tienpo, que 
vnos buenos teologos no lo dixeran mejor, y despues de de- 
clarado Como somos xpianos E todas las cosas tocantes a nra 
santa fee q se convenian dezir y les dixeron que sus ydolos 
son malos, E que no son buenos, que huyen donde esta 
Aquella senal de la cruz, porq En otra de aquella hechura, 
pades§io muerte y pasion El senor del ^ielo y de la tierra, y 
de todo lo criado, ques En el que nosotros adoramos y creEmos 
ques nro dios verdadero, que se dize Jesuxpo, y que quiso 
Bufrir y pasar aquella muerte por salvar todo El genero vma- 
no, y que rre8U9ito al ter§ero dia y esta En los §ielos, y que 
avemos de ser juzgados del, y se les dixo otras muchas Cosas, 
muy perfectamente dichas y las Entendian bien, y rrespon- 
dian como EUos lo dirian a su senor montezuma, y tanbien 
se les declaro las cosas porq nos Enbio a estas partes nro 
gran Enperador fue, para quitar que no sacrificasen ningu- 
nos yndios, ni otra manera de sacrifi§ios malos, que hazen, 
ni se rrobasen vnos a otros, ni Adorasen aquellas malditas 
figuras y que les rruega, que pongan En su §ibdad. En los 
adoratorios donde Estan los ydolos q Ellos tienen por dio- 
ses, vna cruz como Aquella y pongan vna ymagen de nra 
senora que alii les dio, con su hijo pre5ioso En los bra§os, y 
veran quanto bien les va, y lo q nro dios por Ellos haze 
y porq pasaron otros muchos rrazonamientos E yo no los sa- 
bre Escrevir, lo dexare y traere a la memoria que como vi- 
nieron Con tendile muchos yndios, Esta postrera vez a rres- 
catar pie^as de oro, y no de mucha valia, todos los soldados 
lo rrescatavamos, y aql oro q rrescatavamos, davamos a los 
honbres que trayamos de la mar q yvam a pescar, A trueco 
de su pescado, para tener de Comer, porque de otra manera 
pasavamos mucha nes^esidad de hanbre y cortes se holgava 
dello, y lo disimulava, y aunq lo via, y se lo dezian muchos 
criados, E amigos, de diego velasquez, que para que nos de- 
xava rrescatar y lo que sobrello paso dire adelante. 



116 



CAPITULO XLI. de lo que se hizo sobre El 
rrescatar del oro, y de otras cosas que en 
el rreal pasaron. — 




OMO vieron los Amigos de diego velasquez que al- 
gunos soldados rrescatavamos oro, dixeronselo A 
cortes, que para q lo consentia, y que no le Enbio 
diego Velasquez, para que los soldados se llevasen todo el 
mas de El oro y que Era bien mandar pregonar qiie no rres- 
catasen mas de ay adelante, si no fuese el mismo Cortes y lo 
que oviesen avido, que lo manifestasen para sacar El rreal 
quinto, E que se pusiese vna persona, que fuese conviniente, 
para cargo de tesorero. Cortes a todo dixo q Era bien, lo que 
dezian, y que la tal persona que la nonbrasen Ellos y sefia- 
laron a vn gongalo mexia, y despues de hecho esto, les di- 
xo cortes no de buen senblante, mira senores q nros Con- 
paiieros pasan gran trabajo de no tener Con q sesustentar, y 
por Esta cavsa aviamos de disimular, porq todos Comiesen 
quanto mas ques vna miseria, quanto rrescatan, q mediante 
dios mucho Es lo q avemos de aver, porque todas las cosas 
tienen su haz y Envez, ya esta pregonado que no rrescaten 
mas oro, como aveys qridoy veremos de q comeremos. A qui 
Es donde dize El coronista gomara que lo hazia Cortes porq 
no creyese montezuma, q se nos dava nada por oro, y no le in- 
formaron bien, que desde lo de grijalba. En el rrio de van- 
deras, lo sabia muy claramente y demas desto, quando le En- 
biamos A demandar el caxco de oro. En granos, de las minas, 
y nos vian rrescatar, pues que gente mexicana para no En- 
tendello: y dexemos Esto pues dize que por ynforma5ion lo 
sabe, y digamos Como vna manana no amanes5io yndio nin- 
guno d^ los questavan En las cho§as q solian traer de comer 



117 

ni los que rrescatavan, y Con Ellos pitalpitoq q sin hablar 
palabra, se fueron huyendo, y la cavsa fue segund despues 
Alcan§amos a saber q se lo Enbio a mandar montezuma, q. 
, no aguardase mas platicas de Cortes, ni de los que Con El ' 
estavamos, porq pares^e ser, como montezuma Era muy de- * 
boto, de sus ydolos, que se dezian tezcatepuca, E huichilobos, • 
El vno dezian q Era dios de la guerra, y El tezcatepuca El 
dios del ynfierno, y les sacrificava cada dia muchachos para' 
.que le diesen rrepuesta de lo q avia de hazer de nosotros, por- 
quel motezuma tenia pensamiento, q, si no nos tornavamos 
a yr En los navios, de nos aver todos a las manos, para que 
hiziesemos generation/ y tanbien para tener q sacrificar, se- 
.gun despues supimos, que la rrespuesta q le dieron sus ydo- 
los que no curase mas de oyr a cortes ni las palabras q le En- 
• bia a dezir, que tuviese cruz y la ymagen de nra senora q no 
la truxesen A su ^ibdad, y por Esta cavsa se fueron sin ha- 
blar y como vimos aquella novedad creymos questavan de 
guerra y Estavamos sienpre muy mas A punto aper§ebidos 
y vn dia estando yo, E otro soldado puestos por Espias, En 
vnos arenales, vimos venir por la playa, §inco yndios, y por 
no hazer alboroto por poca Cosa En el rreal, los dexamos lie- 
gar a nosotros y Con alegres rrostros nos hizieron rreveren- 
5ia, A su vsan^a y por senas nos dixeron que los Uevasemos 
al rreal, yo dixe A mi conpanero que se quedase En el puesto, 
E yo yria con Ellos, que En aquella sazon no me pesavan 
los pies, Como agora q soy biejo, y desque llegaron a donde 
cortes estava, le hizieron gran Acato, y le dixeron, lope, lu- 
zio, lope luzio, que quiere dezir en lengua totonaque, senor, 
y gran senor y tray an vnos grandes agujeros, En los bezos 
de abajo, y En ellos vnas rrodaxas de piedras pintadillas de 
Azul y otros, con vnas ojas, de oro delgadas, y En las orejas 
muy grandes agujeros. En ellas puestas otras rrodaxas, con 
oro y piedras, y muy diferente traxe y habla que trayan, que 
la de los mexicanos q solian Estar con nosotros, y como dona 
marina y aguilar, las lenguas, oyeron Aquello de lope luze, 

1 Testado en el original: *'y Con Ella hazer la guerra/' 



118 

no lo Entendian, dixo la dofia marina, En la lengua de me- 
xico, que si avia alii Entre EUos nahuatatos, que son ynter- 
petres de la lengua mexicana, y rrespondieron, los dos de 
aquellos §inco, que si, que ellos la Entendian, y dixeron que 
fuesemos bien venidos, E que su senor les Enbiava a saber 
quien Eramos y q se holgara servir a honbres tan Esfor^ados, 
porq pares^e ser ya sabian lo de tavasco y lo de potonchan, 
y mas dixeron, que ya ovieran venido a vernos, si no [fuera] 
por temor de los de culua, que solian Estar Alii con nos- 
Ajotros, y culua y culua, Entiendese por mexicanos, ques como 
. si dixesemos cordoveses o billanos, E que supieron, que avia 
tres dias q se avian ydo huyendo A sus tierras, y de platica 
. En platica, supo Cortes como tenia montezuma Enemigos e 
' contrarios, de lo qual se holgo, y con dadivas y alagos que 
les dio, despidio aquellos §inco mensajeros y les dixo, que di- 
xesen a su senor, quel les yria a ver muy presto. Aquellos 
yndios Uamavamos dende Ay adelante, los lopes, luzios, y de- 
xallo E Agora, y pasemos adelante y digamos, que En aque- 
llos arenales donde Estavamos avia sienpre muchos mosqui- 
tos, Ansi de los §ancudos, como de los chicos, que llaman xe- 
xenes, q son peores que los grandes, y no podiamos dormir 
dellos, y no avia bastimentos, y el ca^abi se apocaba y muy 
mohoso, y suzio de las fatulas y algunos soldados de los que 
solian tener yndios En la ysla de Cuba sospirando por bol- 
verse a sus casas. En Espe9ial de los criados E amigos de diego 
Velasquez, y como Cortes ansi vido la cosa y voluntades, man- 
do que nos fuesemos al pueblo, que abia visto El montejo, y 
El piloto alaminos, questava En fortaleza, que se dize quia- 
viztlan y q los navios estarian Al abrigo del peiiol, por mi 
nonbrado, y como se ponia por la obra para nos yr, todos los 
amigos y debdos y criados del diego Velasquez dixeron a Cor- 
tes que para q queria hazer Aquel viaje, sin bastimentos, E 
que no tenia posibilidad para pasar mas Adelante, porque ya 
se avian muerto En nro rreal de heridas de lo de tabasco y 
de dolencias y hanbre, sobre treynta E 5inco soldados, y q 
la tierra Era grande y las poblazones de mucha gente E que 
nos darian guerra, vn dia q otro, y q seria mejor q nos volvie- 



] 



119 

semos a cuba a dar Cuenta al diego velasquez del oro rresca- 
tado, pues Era Cantidad y de los grandes presentes de mon- 
tezuma q Era el sol E luna de plata y el Caxqte de oro 
menudo de minas y de todas las joyas y rropa por mi me- 
moradas, y cortes les rrespondio q no es buen consejo bolver, 
sin ver, por que E que hasta agora, q no nos podiamos que- 
xar de la fortuna E q diesemos gra^ias a dios, q En todo nos 
ayudava, y q En quanto a los q se an muerto, q En las gue- 
rras y trabajos suele aconteger y q sera bien saber lo q Ay 
En la tierra, y que Entre tanto del mayz y bastimentos que 
tienen los yndios, y pueblos gercanos Comeriamos, o mal nos 
andarian las manos, y con Esta rrespuesta se sosego algo la 
pargialidad del diego velasquez, aunq no mucho, que ya avia 
corrillos dellos y platica En el rreal, sobre la buelta a Cuba, 
y dexallo e aqui y dire lo que mas avino 



CAPITULO XLII. Como alijamos a hernan- 
do cortes por capitan general, E justi^ia 
mayor hasta q su magestad, En ello man- 
dase lo q fuese servido y lo que En ello 
se hizo. 

ya E dho que En el rreal andavan los parientes, E iimigos 
del diego velasquez perturbando que no pasasemos adelante 
y que desde alii de san juan de vlua nos bolviesemos a la 
ysla de Cuba, pares§e ser que ya Cortes tenia puesto en pla- 
ticas con alonzo Hernandez puerto carrero, y con pedro de 
alvarado, y sus quatro hermanos, jorge, y gongalo E gomez 
y juan, todos alvarados, con xpoval de oli, y alonso de avi- 
la y joan descalante, E fran§isco de lugo, E conmigo, E otros 
cavalleros y capitanes, que le pidiesemos por Capitan. El 
frangisco de montejo bien lo Entendio y estavase a la mira, 
y vna noche, a mas de media noche, vinieron a mi cho§a El 



120 

alonso Hernandez puerto Carrero y el juan descalante y 
el fran^ de lugo, q Eramos Algo debdos yo y el lugo, y de 
vna tierra, y me dixeron A senor bernal diaz del castillo, 
sali Aca, con vras armas A rrondar, aconpanaremos A cortes 
que anda rrondando y desquestuve apartido de la choja, me 
dixeron mira senor, tened seereto de vn poco q os queremos 
dezir que pesa mucho, y no lo Entiendan los conpafieros 
questan En vro rrancho, que son de la parte de diego Velas- 
quez, y lo que me platicaron fue, pares§eo8, senor, bien que 
hernando cortez, ansi nos aya traydo Engafiados a todos y 
dio pregones en cuba que venia a poblar y agora Emos sa- 
bido q no trae poder pa EUo, sino para rrescatar y quieren 
q nos bolvamos a Santiago de cuba con todo El oro que se 
avido, y quedaremos, todos perdidos, y tomarse a el oro die- 
go Velasquez Como la otra vez, mira sefior que aveys venido 
ya tres ve?es con Esta postrera gastando vros averes, y aveys 
quedado Enpenado, aventurando tantas ve^es la vida, Con 
tantas heridas, hazemoslo senor saber porq no pase Esto mas 
adelante y estamos muchos cavalleros q sabemos q son ami- 
gos de vra md para questa tierra se pueble En nonbre de su 
magestad, y hernando cortez En su rreal nonbre y En te- 
niendo que tengamos posibilidad, hazello saber En castilla, 
a nro rrey, y senor, y tenga senor Cuydado de dar El boto 
pa q todos le Elixamos por capitan de vnanime y voluntad, 
porques servisio de dios E de nro rrey e senor, yo rrespon- 
di, q la yda de cuba, no Era buen Acuerdo y que seria bien 
q la tierra se poblase, E q eligiesemos a cortes por general, 
y justigia mayor, hasta que su magestad otra cosa mandaae y 
andando de soldado En soldado, Este con^ierto, Alcan§olo a 
saber los debdos y amigos del diego velasquez, que Eran 
muchos mas q nosotros y con palabras Algo sobradas, dixe- 
ron A cortes que para q Andava con mafias para qdarse en 
esta tierra, sin yr A dar quenta A quien le Enbio, para ser 
capitan, porque diego velasquez, no se lo ternia a bien y q 
luego nos fuesemos A Enbarcar, y que no Curase de mas 
rrodeos y andar En secretos c6 los soldados, pues no tenia 
bastimentos ni gente ny posibilidad para que pudiese poblar 



121 

y Cortes rrespondio, sin mostrar Enojo, y dixo que le plazia 
que no yria contra las ynstrugiones y memorias que traya 
. del diego velasquez, y mando luego pregonar, que para otro 
i dia, todos nos Enbarcasemos, cada vno En El navio que avia 
' venido, y los q aviamos sido en El congierto, le rrespondi- 
mos que no Era bien traemos ansi Engafiados, que En cuba 
pregono q venia A poblar y q viene a rrescatar y que le rre- 
querimos de parte de dios nro sefior y de su mag que luego 
"" poblase y no hiziese otra cosa, porque Era muy gran bien y 
serviyio de dios y de su magestad, y se le dixo muchas Co- 
sas bien dichas sobre el caso diziendo q los naturales no nos 
dexarian desEnbarcar otra vez Como Agora, y que En estar 
poblada Aquesta tierra, sienpre Acudirian de todas las yslas 
soldados, para nos Ayudar y que diego velasquez, nos A he- 
chado A perder con publicar q tenia provisiones de su ma- 
gestad, para poblar siendo Al contrario E q nosotros queria- 
mos poblar, E q se fuese quien quisiese A cuba por manera 
que cortes lo Agebto, y avnque se hazia mucho de rrogar y 
como dize El rrefran tu me lo rruegas, E yo me lo quiero 
^y fue con Condition que le hiziesemos justigia mayor y ca- 
^pitan general y lo peor de todo, que le otorgamos que le die- 
semos El quinto del oro de lo que se oviese, despues de sa- 
cado El rreal quinto y luego le dimos poderes, muy bastan- 
•tisimos delante de vn Escribano del rrey q se dezia diego de 
.godoy, para todo lo por mi Aqui dho y luego ordenamos 
de hazer y fundar E poblar vna villa, que se nonbro la villa 
'rrica de la vera Cruz, porque Uegamos jueves de la gena y 
desEnbarcamos En viernes santo de la cruz, E rrica por 
aquel cavallero, q dixe En el capitulo [XXVI] que se Uego a 
cortes yle dixo, q mirase las tierras rricas,y quese supiesebien 
govemar, E quiso dezir q se quedase por Capitan general. El 
qual Era El Alonso hernandez puerto carrero, y bolvamos a 
nra rrelagion q fundada la villa, hezimos alcaldes y rregido- 
res y fueron los primeros alcaldes, alonso hernandez puerto 
carrero y fran§isco de montejo, y a este montejo, porq no 
Estava muy bien con Cortes, por metelle En los primeros, 
y pringipal, le mando nonbrar por alcalde, y los rregidores 

BenuJ Diaz del CastUlo.— 17. 



122 

dexallos E de Escrevir, porq no haze al caso que nonbre al- 
gunos, y dire como se puso vna picota En la plaza y fuera 
de la villa vna horca, y sefialamos por Capitan para las En- 
tradas a pedro de alvarado, y maestre de Canpo, a xpoual 
de oli, y alguazil mayor a juan descalante y tesorero gon^a- 
lo mexia, y Contador alonso de avila, y alferez a hulano co- 
rral, porque El villa rroel q Avia sido alferez, nose que 
Enojo avia hecho a cortes sobre vna yndia de Cuba, y se le 
quito El cargo, y alguazil del rreal A ochoa vizcajmo, y a 
vn alonso rromero diran agora q Como no nonbro En esta 
rrelagion al Capitan gouQalo de sandoval, siendo vn capitan 
tan nonbrado, q despues de Cortes ^ fue la segunda persona, 
y de quien tanta noti§ia tuvo El Enperador nro sefior. A 
esto digo que como Era man§ebo Entonzes no se tuvo tanta 
cuenta con El y con otros balerosos Capitanes, hasta que le 
vimos flores§er En tanta manera, que cortes y todos los sol- 
dados le teniamos En tanta Estima Como Al mismo cortes, 
como Adelante dire y quedarse a Aqui Esta rrelagion y dire 
Como El coronista gomara dize que por rrela§ion sabe lo ques- 
crive y Esto que Aqui digo paso ansi y todo lo demas 
quescrive no le dieron buena cuenta de lo que dize E otra 
cosa veo, que para q parezca ser verdad lo que En ello Es- 
cribe todo lo q En el caso pone, Es muy Al rreves, por mas 
buena rretorica que En el escrevir ponga, y dexallo E, y 
dire lo que la par§ialidad del diego velasq' hizo sobre que no 
fuese por capitan Elegido cortes y nos bolviesemos a la ysla 
de Cuba. 

1 Tachado en el original: ''y pedro de alvarado." 



m 



CAPITULO XLIII. Como la parijialidad de 
diego Velasquez, perturbavan El poder que 
aviamos dado A Cortes y lo que sobrello 
se hizo — 

desque la par^ialidad de diego velasquez, vieron que de he- 
cho aviamos Elegido A Cortes por capitan general y justi^ia 
mayor, nonbrada la villa y alcaldes y rregidores, y nonbra- 
do Capitan A pedro de alvarado y alguazil mayor y maestre 
de Canpo, y todo lo por mi dho, Estavan tan Enojados y rra- 
viosos, que Comengaron A armar vandos E chirinolas y avn 
palabras muy mal dichas Contra Cortes, e Contra los que le 
Elegimos, e q no Era bien hecho, sin ser sabidores dello to- 
dos los capitanes y soldados q AUi venian, y que no le dio 
tales poderes El diego velasquez, sino para rrescatar, y harto 
teniamos los del vando de Cortes de mirar que no se desver- 
gvngasen mas y viniesemos A las armas. Entonges aviso Cor- 
tes secretamente a juan descalante, que le hiziesemos pares- 
5er las ynstruc^iones que traya del diego Velasquez, lo qual 
luego Cortes las saco del seno y las dio a vn escrivano del 
rrey que las leyese y desque dezia En ellas desque ovieredes 
rresCatado lo mas que pudieredes, os bolvereys, y venian fir- 
madas del diego velasquez y rrefrendadas de su secretario 
Andres de duero, pedimos A Cortes q las mandase Encorpo- 
rar Juntamente con el poder que le dimos y ansi mismo El 
pregon que se dio En la ysla de Cuba, y esto fue A cavsa que 
Bu mag^tad supiese En Espana, como todo lo que haziamos 
Era en su rrl. servi§io, y no nos levantasen alguna Cosa con- 
traria de la verdad, y fue harto buen Acuerdo, segund En 
castilla nos tratava don juan rrodriguez de fonseca, obispo 
de burgos, y ar§obispo de rrosano que ansi se llamava lo qual 
supimos por muy gierto q andava por nos destruir, Como ade- 
lante dire — hecho esto, bol vieron otra vez los mismos Ami- 



124 

gos y criados del diego velasquez A dezir que no estava bien 
hecho averle Elegido, sin Ellos, E que no qrian estar debajo 
de su mando, sino bolverse luego A la ysla de Cuba y Cor- 
tes les rrespondia, que El no deternia A ninguno por fuer9a 
E qualquiera que le viniese a pedir liyenjia, se la daria de 
bu- voluntad avnque se quedase solo, y con esto los Asosego 
a algunos dellos, E§eto al juan velasquez de leon, q Erapa- 
riente del diego Velasqz E a diego de ordaz y a escobar q 11a- 
mabamos El paje porq avia sido criado del diego Velasquez, 
y a pedro Escudero, y a otros'amigos del diego Velasquez, E a 
tan to vino la cosa, que poco ni mucho le querian obedejer, y 
cortes con nro fabor, determino de prender al joan Velasquez 
de leon y al diego de ordas, y a escobar El paje E a pedro es- 
cudero y a otros que ya no me Acuerdo, y por los demas mi- 
ravamos no oviese algund rruydo, y estuvieron presos, con 
cadenas y belas que les mandavan poner 5iertos dias y pasa- 
re adelante y dire Como fue pedro de alvarado A Entrar en 
vn pueblo gerca de alii. — Aqui dize El coronista gomara. En 
su ystoria, muy contrario de lo que paso y quien viere su 
ystoria, vera ser muy estremado En hablar, si bien le ynfor- 
maran, o el dixera lo q psava 



C APITULO XLini. Como fue acordado de 
Enbiar a pedro de alvarado la tierra aden- 
tro, A buscar mayz y bastimento, y lo que 
mas paso. — 

ya que aviamos hecho E ordenado lo por mi Aqui dho, Acor- 
damos q fuese pedro de alvarado la tierra adentro, a vnos 
pueblos que teniamos notisia, questavan gerca, para q viese 
que tierra Era, y para traer maiz E algun bastimento, porque 
En el rreal pasavamos mucha nesgesidad, y llebo §ient sol- 
dados y Entre Ellos quinze ballesteros, y seys Escopeteros, 
y Eran destos soldados mas de la mitad de la parjialidad del 



12« 

diego Velasquez y quedamos con cortes todos los de su ban- 
do, por temor no oviese mas rroydo ni chirinola y se levan- 
tasen contra el, hasta Asegurar mas la cosa y desta manera 
fue el alvarado a vnos pueblos chicos subjetos de otro pueblo 
que se dezia cotastan, que Eran de lengua de Culua, y este 
nonbre de Culua Es En aquella tierra, como si dixesen los 
rromanos o sus aliados ansi Es toda la lengua de la par9ia- 
lidad de mexico y de montezuma, y a Este fin, En toda 
Aquesta tierra, quaudo dixese Culua, son vasallos y subjetos 
A mexico y ansi se an de Entender, y llegado el p^ de alva- 
rado, a los pueblos, todos estavan despoblados, de aquel mis- 
mo dia y hallo sacrificados En vnos Cues honbres y mucha- 
chos y las paredes y altares de sus ydolos con sangre y los 
Cora^ones presentados A los ydolos, y tanbien hallaron las 
piedras sobre q los sacrificavan y los cuchillazos de pedernal 
Con que los abrian por los pechos para les sacar los corago- 
nes, dixo El pedro de alvarado que avian hallado En todos 
los mas de Aquellos Cuerpos muertos, sin bragos y piernas, 
E q dixeron otros yndios, que los avian llevado para comer, 
de lo qui nros soldados se admiraron mucho de tan grandes 
crueldades, y dexemos de hablar de tanto sacrifiyio, pues 
dende alii Adelante, En cada pueblo no hallavamos otra Co- 
sa, y bolvamos A pedro de alvarado, que En Aqllos pueblos 
los hallo muy baste9idos de Comida, y despoblados de aquel 
dia de yndios que no pudo hallar sino dos yndios que le tru- 
xeron mayz, y ansi ovo de Cargar cada soldado de gallinas 
y de otras legunbres, y bolviose Al rrl sin mas dano, les ha- 
zer, avnq hallo bien En q, porq ansi se lo mando cortes q no 
fuese como lo de Cogumel, y En el rreal nos holgamos Con 
aquel poco bastimento que truxo, porque todos los males E 
trabajos se pasan con El comer. Aqui es donde dize El coro- 
nista gomara, q fue Cortes la tierra Adentro, Con quatro- 
gientos soldados, no le ynformaron bien, quel primero q fue 
Es El por mi aqui dho, y no otro, y tornemos A nra platica, 
q como Cortes En todo ponia gran diligen§ia, procuro de 
hacerse Amigo de la par5ialidad del diego velasquez, porq a 
vnos Con dadivas del oro q Abiamos avido, que quebranta 



pefias, E otros prometimientos, los atraxo a si, y los saco de 
las prisiones, Egeto al juan Velasquez de leon, y al diego 
de ordas, questavan En cadenas En los navios, y dende A po- 
cos dias, tanbien los solto de las prisiones, E hizo tan buenos 
y verdaderos Amigos dellos, Como adelante veran y todo con 
el oro, que lo amansa, ya todas las cosas puestas En este es- 
tado, Acordamos de nos yr Al pueblo questava En fortaleza, 
ya otra vez por mi memorado, que se dize quiaviztlan y que 
lo^ navios se fuesen al pefiol y puerto, questava Enfrente de 
aquel pueblo, obra de vna legua del, E yendo costa A costa, 
acuerdome que se mato vn gran pescado, que le hecho la mar 
En la costa En seco, y llegamos a vn rrio donde Esta poblar 
do agora la Veracruz, y venia Algo hondo, y con vnas ca- 
noas quebradas que son como artezas y a nado y En balsas 
pasamos y de aquella parte del rrio, Estavan vnos pueblos 
subjetos a otro gran pueblo que se dezia 5enpoal, donde he- 
ran naturales los §inco yndios de los bcQOtes de oro, que he 
dho q vinieron por mensageros a cortes q les llamamos lope- 
luzios En el arenal, y hallamos las casas de ydolos y sacrifi- 
caderos y sangre derramada, y Ensenjios con q savmavan y 
otras cosas de ydolos y de piedras. Con que sacrificavan, y plu- 
mas de papagayos, y muchos libros de su papel, cogidos a do- 
blezes, Como a manera de pafios de Cast^ y no allamos yn- 
dios ningunos, porq se avian ya huydo q como no avian visto 
honbres como nosotros, ni cavallos tuvieron temor, y alii dor- 
mimos aquella noche y no ovo que genar y otro dia Camina- 
mos la tierra Adentro, hazia El poniente, y dexamos la costa 
y no sabiamos El camino, y topamos vnos buenos prados q 
llaman ^avanas y estavan pa9iendo vnos benados y corrio pe- 
dro de alvarado, con su yegua Alazana, tras vn benado, y le 
dio vna langada y herido se metio por vn monte, que no se 
pudo aver y Estando En esto vimos venir doze yndios, que 
Eran v^s de aquellas estan^ias donde abiamos dormido y 
venian de hablar A su Ca§ique, y trayan gallinas y pan de 
mayz y dixeron a cortes, con nras lenguas, q su sefior Enbia 
Aqllas gallinas, q comiesemos y nos rrogava fuesemos a su 
pueblo qstaba de alii, A lo q sefialaron, andadura de vn dia, 



127 

porques vn sol y cortes les dio las gra^ias y les alago y cami- 
namos adelante y dormimos En otro pueblo chico que tan- 
bien tenia hecho muchos sacrifi§io8, y porque Estaran hartos 
de oyr, de tantos yndios E yndias q Allavamos sacrificados 
En todos los pueblos y caminos q topavamos, pasare adelan- 
te sin dezir de q manera E que cosas tenian y dire como nos 
dieron En aql poblezuelo de genar y supimos que Era por 
9enpoal El camino para yr a quiaviztlan, que ya E dho ques- 
tava En vna fuerga, y pasare adelante y dire como Entramos 
En 9enpoal — 



CAPITULO XLIIV [XLV] Como Entra- 
mos En Qenpoal, que En aquella sazon 
Era muy buena poblazon, y lo que alii 
pasamos. 

y como dormimos En aquel poblezuelo, donde nos aposenta- 
ron los doze yndios que E dho, y despues de bien ynforma- 
dos del camino q aviamos de Uebar, para yr al pueblo ques- 
tava En el penol, muy de mafiana se lo hizimos saber a los 
caciques de genpoal Como yvamos A su pueblo, y que lo tu- 
viesen por bien, y para ello Enbio los seys yndios por men- 
sageros, y los otros seys qdaron pa q nos guiasen, y mando 
cortes poner muy En orden los tiros y escopeteros y valles- 
teros y sienpre corredores del canpo, descubriendo, y los de 
cavallo y todos los demas muy Apergebidos, y desta manera, 
Caminamos hasta q Uegamos vna legua del pueblo, E ya 
questavamos ^erca del, salieron veynte yndios pringipales A 
nos rresgebir de partes del ca§ique y truxeron vnas pifias de 
rrosas de la trra muy olorosas y dieron a cortes y a los de a 
cavallo, con gran amor y le dixeron, q su Sefior nos estava 
Esperando En los aposentos, y por ser honbre muy gordo y 
pesado, no podia venir a nos rresgebir y cortes le dio las gra- 
(jias, y se fueron adelante, E ya que ybamos Entrando Entre 



128 

las casas, desque vimos tan gran pueblo, y no aviamos visto 
otro mayor, nos admiramos mucho dello, y como estava tan 
biyioso, y hecho vn vergel, y tan poblado de horibres y mu- 
geres, las calles llenas que nos salian a ver davamos muchos 
loores, a dios, que tales tierras aviamos descubierto, y nros 
corredores del canpo, que y van a cavallo, paresge ser llegaron 
a la gran plaga y patios donde Estavan los aposentos, y de 
pocos dias, segund paresgio, tenianlos muy Encalados y rre- 
luzientes, que lo saben muy bien hazer, y paresgio al vno 
de los de cavallo, que Era aquello bianco q rreluzia pla- 
ta y buelve a rrienda suelta a dezir A cortes, como tienen 
las paredes de plata, y dofia marina E aguilar dixeron, que 
seria yeso o cal, y tubimos bien que rreyr de su plata E fre- 
nesia, q sienpre despues le deziamos que todo lo bianco le 
paresgia plata, dexemos de la burla y digamos, Como llega- 
mos a los Aposentos, y El cagique gordo, nos salio a rres§e- 
bir junto al patio, q porq Era muy gordo, ansi lo nonbrare, 
E hizo muy gran rreverencia A cortes y le savmo, que ansi 
lo tenia de costunbre, y cortes le abra§o y Alii nos aposen- 
taron, En vnos aposentos arto buenos y grandes, que cabia- 
mos todos y nos dieron de comer, y pusieron vnos gestos de 
§irguelas, q avia muchas, porq Era tienpo dellas, y pan de su 
mayz y como veniamos anbrientos y no aviamos visto otro 
tan to bastimento, Como Entonges, pusimos nonbrcaquel 
pueblo, villa vigiosa, E otros le nonbraron sevilla, E man- 
do cortes, que ningun soldado les hiziese Enojo ni se aparta- 
se de aquella pla§a y desque El cagique gordo supo que 
aviamos comido le Envio a dezir a cortes que le queria yr a 
ver, E vino con buena Copia de yndios pringipales y todos 
trayan grandes bezotes de oro, E rricas mantas, y cortes tan- 
bien le salio al Encuentro del aposento, y Con grandes qui- 
ri§ias y alagos, le torno abragar, y luego mando el cagique 
gordo, que truxesen vn presente, que tenia Aparejado, de 
Cosas de joyas de oro y mantas y avnque no fue mucho, sine 
de poco valor, y le dixo A cortes lope luzio, lope luzio, rre- 
gibe Esto de buena voluntad, E que si mas tuviera que se lo 
diera. ya E dho que En lengua tonaque dixeron sefior y gran 



129 

eenor, quando dize lope luzio Ece. y cortes le dixo con dofia 
marina E aguilar, quel se lo pagaria En buenas obras E que 
lo que oviese menester, que se lo dixesen, quel lo haria por 
EUoSy porque somos vasallos de vn tan gran sefior, ques El 
enperador don carlos, que manda muchos rreynos, y tierras, 
y que nos Envia para deshazer Agravios y castigar a los ma- 
los, y mandar que no saerifiquen mas animas, y se les dio a 
Entender otras muchas cosas, tocantes a nra santa fee, y lue- 
go como aqllo oyo El cagique gordo, dando sospiros, se que- 
xa rreziamente del gran montezuma, y de sus governadores, 
diziendo, que de pocos tienpos Aca, le avia sojuzgado, y que 
le a llebado todas sus joyas de oro, y les tiene tan apremia- 
dos, q no osan hazer sino lo q les manda, porques senor de 
grandes gibdades, y tierras, y vasallos, y Exergitos de guerra, 
y como Cortes Entendio que de aquellas quexas, que davan, 
al presente, no podia Entender En ello les dixo, quel haria 
de manera que fuesen desagraviados, E porquel yva a ver 
sus Acales, que En lengua de yndios ansi llaman a los navios, 
E hazer su estada y asiento en el pueblo de quiaviztlan, q 
desque alii Este de Asiento, se veran mas despagio, y El ca- 
5ique gordo le rrespondio muy conyertadamente, y otro dia 
de mafiana salimos de §enpoal y tenia Aparejados, sobre 
quatro^ientos yndios de Carga, que En aquellas partes llaman 
tamemes que llevan dos arrobas de peso A cuestas, y cami- 
nan con Ella ^inco leguas, y desque vimos tanto yndio para 
carga, nos holgamos porque de antes trayamos a cuestas nras 
mochilas, los que no tenian yndios de cuba, porq no pasaron 
En la armada, sino §inco o seys, y no tantos Como dize El 
gomara, y dofia marina y aguilar nos dixeron que En aques- 
tas tierras, quando estan de paz, sin demandar quien lleve la 
carga^ los caciques son obligados de dar de aquellos tamemes 
y desde alii adelante, donde quiera que yvamos, demanda- 
vamos yndios para las cargas, y despedido Cortes del cagique 
gordo, otro dia, Caminamos nro camino y fuymos a dormir 
A vn poblezuelo, gerca de quiaviztlan, y estava despoblado, 
y los de §enpoal truxeron de 5enar. Aqui Es donde dize El 
coronista gomara, questuvo Cortes muchos dias En genpoal, 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo.—lS. 



180 

E que se con5erto la rrebelion E liga contra montezuma, no 
le ynformaron bien, porq como E dho, otro dia por la mafia- 
na, salimos de alii, y donde se concerto la rrebelion y por q 
cavsa, Adelante lo dire, E quedese ansi, E digamos, como 
Entramos En quiaviztlan. 



C APITULO XLVL Como Entramos En quia- 
viztlan que Era pueblo puesto En fortale- 
za y nos Acogieron de paz. 

otro dia a ora de las diez, llegamos En el pueblo fuerte q se 
dize quiaviztlan questa Entre grandes pefiascos y muy altas 
Cuestas, y si oviera rresistencia, Era malo de tomar, E yen- 
do Con buen con§ierto y ordenan^a creyendo questuviese de 
guerra, yva El artilleria delante y todos subiamos En aque- 
Ua fortaleza, de manera q si algo aconte^iera, ha^er lo q Era- 
mos obligados, Entonges Alonso de abila llevo Cargo de ca- 
pitan, Como Era soverbio E de mala Condi9ion, porq vn 
soldado q se dezia hernando alonso de villa nueva, no yba 
En buena ordenan^a, le dio vn bote de langa En vn brajo, 
que le manco y despues se llamo hernando alonso de villa 
nueva, El manquillo, diran q sienpre salgo de orden, al me- 
jor tienpo, por Contar Cosas viejas dexemoslo y digamos q 
En la mitad de aquel pueblo, no hallamos yndio ninguno 
con quien hablar, de lo qual nos maravillamos, q se avian ydo 
huyendo de miedo, aquel propio dia, desq nos vieron subir 
a sus casas y estando En lo mas alto de la fortaleza, En vna 
pla§a, junto a donde tenian los Cues E Casas grandes de sus 
ydolos, vimos Estar quinze yndios, Con buenas mantas, y 
cada vno vn brasero de barro y En ellos de su ynsen^io, y vi- 
nieron donde cortes estava y le savmaron y a los soldados 
que 5erca dellos estavamos, y con grandes rreverenjias le di- 
zen, q les perdonen porq no ban salido a nos rres§ebir y que 
fuesemos bien venidos, E q rreposasemos, E q de miedo se 



181 

avian avsentado, hasta ver que Cosas Eramos porq tenian 
miedo de nosotros y de los cavallos, E que Aquella noche 
les mandarian poblar todo El pueblo y Cortes les mostro mu- 
cho amor y les dixo muchas cosas, tocantes a nra santa fee, 
Como sienpre lo teniamos de costunbre, a doquiera q Uega- 
vamos, y q Eramos vasallos de nro gran Enperador don 
carlos, y les dio vnas cuentas verdes E otras Cosillas de Casti- 
Ua, y EUos truxeron luego gallinas y pan de mayz y Estan- 
do En estas platicas vinieron luego a dezir A cortes, q venia 
El caijique gordo de genpoal En andas y a cuestas de muchos 
yndios prin^ipales y desque allego El cagique estuvo hablan- 
do Con cortes juntamente Con el cagique y otros prin§ipales 
de aquel pueblo dando tantas quexas de montezuma y con- 
tava de sus grandes poderes y dezialo Con lagrimas y sospi- 
ros, que cortes y los questavamos presentes, tuvimos manzi- 
11a, y demas de contar por que bia les avia subjetado, que 
cada afio les demandavan muchos hijos E hijas para sacrifi- 
car, y otros para servir En sus casas, y sementeras y otras 
muchas quexas, que fueron tantas, q ya no se me Acuerda, 
y que los rrecavdadores de montezuma, les tomavan sus mu- 
geres E hijas, si Eran hermosas y las forgaban, y que otro 
tanto hazian En toda aquella trra de la lengua totonaque 
que Eran mas de treynta pueblos y Cortes les consolava. Con 
nras lenguas, cuanto podia, E que les favoresgeria En todo 
lo que pudiese y quitaria aquellos rrobos, y agrabios, y que 
para Eso le Envio a Estas partes El enperador nro senor y 
que no tuviesen pena ninguna, y que presto lo verian, lo q 
sobrello haziamos, y con estas palabras rres^ibieron Algun 
contento, mas no se les asigurava El cora§on con el gran te- 
mor que tenian a los mexicanos y estando En estas platicas, 
vinieron vnos yndios del mismo pueblo, muy de priesa, a 
dezir a todos los caciques que alii estavan hablando con cor- 
tes, como venian §inco mexicanos, que Eran los rrecavdado- 
res de montezuma, y desque lo oyeron, se les perdio la color 
y tenblavan de miedo, y dexan solo a cortes los salen a rres- 
gebir, y de presto les Enrraman vna sala y les guisan de co- 
mer y les hazen mucho Cacao, ques la mejor cosa que entre 



182 

elloa beven, y quando Entraron por El pueblo los ginco yn- 
dios vinieron por donde Estavamos, porq alii estavan las ca- 
sas del cacique y nros aposentos, y pasaron con tanta Conte- 
nengia E presungion que sin hablar a cortes, ni a ninguno 
de nosotros, se fueron delante, y trayan rricas mantas labra- 
das y los bragueros de la misma manera, que Ententes bra- 
gueros se ponian y El cabello luzio E al^ado como atado En 
la cabeza, y cada vno Con vnas rrosas oliendolas, y mosquea- 
dores que les trayan otros yndios Como criados, y cada vno 
vn bordon como garabato En la mano, y muy aconpafiados 
de pringipales de otros pueblos de la lengua totonaque, y 
hasta q los Uevaron Aposentar, y les dieron de Comer muy 
Altamente, no los dexaron de aconpanar, y despues que pvie- 
ron Comido, mandaron Uamar al ca§iq gordo y a todos los 
mas pringipales, y les rrenieron, que por q nos avian ospeda- 
do En sus pueblos, y que tenian agora que hablar y ver con 
nosotros E q su senor montezuma no sera servido de aquello, 
porq sin su ligen^jia y mandado no nos avian de rrecoger ni 
dar joyas de oro, E sobrello al ca§ique gordo E a los demaa 
pringipales les dixeron muchas amena^as, E que luego les 
diese veynte yndios E yndias para aplacar A sus dioses, por 
El malifigio que avian hecho, y Estando En esto Cortes pre- 
gunto a dona marina E a gr"^** de aguilar nras lenguas, que 
de que Estavan alborotados los caciques desque vinieron 
aquellos yndios, E quien Eran, y la dona marina que muy 
bien lo Entendio se lo conto lo que pasava y luego cortes 
mando llamar Al CaQique gordo y a todos los mas pringipa- 
les y les dixo que quien Eran aquellos yndios, q les hazian 
tanta fiesta- y dixeron que los rrecavdadores del gran mon- 
tezuma E que vienen A ver por que cavsa nos avian rres^e- 
bido sin li5en§ia de su sefior y q les demandan agora veynte 
yndios E yndias para sacrificar A su dios huychilobos, porq 
les de vitoria contra nosotros, porq an dho que dize monte- 
zuma, q los quiere tomar para que sean sus Esclavos, y cor- 
tes les console, y que no oviesen miedo q El estava alii Con 
todos nosotros, y q los castigaria y pasemos adelante a otro 
capitulo, y lo q sobrello se hizo. — 



las 



CAPITULO XLII. [XL VII] Como cortes 
mando q prendiesen Aquellos (jinco rrecav- 
dadores de montezuma, y mando que des- 
de Ay adelante, no le obedesqiesen, ni die- 
sen tributo y la rrebelion que enton^es se 
ordeno contra montezuma. 




OMO cortes Entendio lo que los Cagiques le dezian, 
dixo q ya les abia dho otras vezes quel rrey nro 
sefior, lo mando q viniese a castigar los malhecho- 
res, E que no consintiese sacrifigios, ni rrobos, E puBS Aque- 
llos i^ecavdadores benian con aquella demanda, les mando 
q luego les aprisionasen y los tuviesen presos, hasta q su se- 
fior montezuma sepa la cavsa, Como vienen a rrobar E a lle- 
var por esclavos, sus hijos y mugeres E hazer otras fueryas, 
y quando los ca§iquei3 lo oyeron, estavan espantados de tal 
osadia, mandar que los mensageros del gran montezuma fue- 
sen maltratados, y temian y no osavan hazello, y todavia cor- 
tes les convoco q luego los hechasen En prisiones, y ansi lo 
hizieron, y de tal manera, q En vnas varas largas y Con co- 
Uares segund Entre Ellos se vsa, los pusieron de arte, q no 
86 les podian yr, E vno dellos porq no se dexava Estar le die- 
ron de palos, y demas desto mando Cortes a todos los Ca§i- 
ques, q no les diesen mas tributo, ni obidien§ia A montezu- 
ma, E que ansi lo publicasen En todos los pueblos sus aliados 
E amigos, E q si otros rrecavdadores oviese En otros pueblos 
como aquellos, q se lo hi§iesen fiaber, quel Einbiaria por Ellos 
y como aquella nueva se supo En toda aquella provingia, por- 
que luego Enbio mensageros El ca§ique gordo haziendoselo 
saber y tanbien lo publicaron los prin§ipales, que avian tray- 



184 

do En su Conpania aquellos rrecavdadores, q Como los vie- 
ron presos, luego se desgarraron e fueron Cada vno a su pue- 
blo, a dar mandado y A contar todo lo acaesgido, E viendo 
Cosas tan maravillosas, E de tanto peso para ellos, dixeron 
q no osaron azer aquello honbres vmanos sino tevles, q ansi 
Uamavan a sus ydolos En que adoran, E a esta cavsa, desde 
alii adelante, nos Uamaron tevles ques como E dho o dioses o 
demonios y quando dixere En esta rrela9ioii tevles, En co- 
sas q an de ser mentadas nras personas, sepan que se dize por 
nosotros. bolvamos a dezir de los prisioneros, q los qrian sa- 
crificar por Consejo de todos los Cagiques, porq no se les fue- 
se alguno dellos a dar mandado a mexico y Como Cortes lo 
Entendio, les mando q no los matasen, quel los queria guar- 
dar, y puso de nros soldados, q los velasen, E A media no- 
che mando llamar Cortes a los mismos nros soldados, q los 
guardavan y les dixo, mira, q solteys los dos dellos, los mas 
diligentes que os paregieren, de manera q no lo sientan los 
yndios destos pueblos, y que se los llevasen a su aposento, y 
despues q los tuvo delante, les pregunto Con nras lenguas, q 
por q estavan presos, y de q tierra Eran, como haziendo q no 
los cono9ia, y rrespondieron que los cajiques de (enpoal y de 
aquel pueblo. Con su fabor y El nro los prendieron y cortes 
rrespondio, q El no sabia nada y q le pesa dello, y les man- 
do dar de Comer y les dixo palabras de muchos alagos, y q 
se fuesen luego, a dezir a su sefior montezuma Como Eramos 
todos nosotros, sus grandes amigos y servidores y porque no 
pasasen mas mal les quito las prisiones y rrifiio con los Ca- 
ciques q les tenian presos y que todo lo que ovieren menes- 
ter para su servijio, que lo hara de muy buena voluntad, y 
q los tres yndios sus Conpafieros, q tienen En prisiones, quel 
los mandara soltar y guardar E que vayan muy prestos no los 
tornen Aprender y los maten, y los dos prisioneros rrespon- 
dieron q se lo tenian En md y q avian miedo, que los torna- 
rian a las manos porque por fuerga an de pasar por sus tie- 
rras, y luego mando Cortes a seys honbres de la mar, q Esa 
noche los llevasen En vn batel obra de quatro leguas de alii 
hasta sacalles a tierra segura, fuera de los terminos de yen- 



185 

poal, y Como amanesg io, y los Cajiques de aquel pueblo, y 
El cajique gordo, hallaron menos los dos prisioneros, que- 
rian muy de hecho sacrificar los otros tres que quedavan, si 
Cortes no se los quitara de poder E hizo del Enojado porq 
se avian huydo los otros dos, y mando traer vna cadena del 
navio,.y Echolos En Ella, y luego: los mando Uebar a los 
navios, E dixo quel los queria guardar, pues tan mal Cobro 
pusieron En los demas, y desq los ovieron llebado, les man- 
do quitar las cadenas, y con buenas palabras les dixo, que 
presto los Enbiaria A mexico. dexemoslo ansi, que luego 
questo fue hecho, todos los casiques de 9enpoal, y de aquel 
pueblo, y de otros q se avian alii juntado, de la lengua toto- 
naque, dixeron a cortes q que harian, que ^iertamente ver- 
nian sobre Ellos, los poderes de mexico, del gran montezu- 
ma, y q no podrian Escapar de ser muertos y destruidos, y 
dixo Cortes con senblante muy alegre q El y sus hermanos 
que alii Estavamos, les defenderiamos, y matariamos a quien 
Enojarlos quisiese. Entonyes prometieron todos aquellos pue- 
blos y caciques a vna que serian Con nosotros En todo lo que 
le quisiesemos mandar y juntarian sUs poderes Contra mon- 
tezuma, y todos sus aliados y aqui dieron la obidienf ia A su 
magestad. por ante vn diego de godoy El escribano, y todo 
lo q paso, lo Enbiaron A dezir a los mas pueblos de aquella 
probin§ia como ya no daban tributo ninguno, y los rrecoge- 
dore» no pares^ian, no Cabian de gozo, aver quitado aquel 
dominio. y dexemos Esto y dire Como Acordamos de nos 
abajar a lo llano, a vnos prados donde Comengamos hazer vna 
fortaleza. Esto es lo q paso, y no la rrelagion q sobrello dieron 
Al coronista gomara ^ 

1 Testado en el original: ''por nxejor iretorica que en ello ponga.^' 



136 



CAPITULO XLVIir. Como acordamos de 
poblar la villa rrica de la veracruz, y de ha- 
zer vna fortaleza, En vnos prados, junto a 
vnas Salinas, y (jerca del puerto del nonbre 
feo donde Estavan anclados nros navios, y 
lo que alii se hizo.— 




ESPUES que ovimos hecho liga E amistad, Con mas 
de treynta pueblos de las sierras, q se dezian los 
totonaques, q Entonfes se rrebelaron al gran mon- 
tezuma y dieron la obidien5ia a su magestad, y se profirie- 
ron de nos servir Gon aquella ayuda tan presta, acordamos 
de fundar la villa rrica de la vera cruz, En vnos llanos, me- 
dia legua del pueblo questava Como En fortaleza que se di- 
ze quiaviztlan, y tra§ada yglesia y pla§a, y atara5afias, y todas 
las cosas q Convenian para ser villa E hizimos vna fortaleza 
y desde En los gimientos, y En acaballa de tener alta para 
Enmaderar y hechas troneras E cubos y barbacanas, dimos 
tanta priesa que desde Cortes, que Comenjo El primero a 
sacar tierra a cuestas y piedras, E a ondar los 9imientos, Co- 
mo todos los Capitanes y soldados a la contina Entendiamos 
En ello, y trabajavamos por la acabar de presto, los vnos En 
los §imientos, y otros En hazer las tapias y otros en acarrear 
agua, y en las caleras. En hazer ladrillos E tejas y en buscar 
comida. Otros En la madera, los herreros En la clavazon por- 
que teniamos dos herreros, y desta manera trabajamos En 
ello a la contina, desdel mayor hasta el menor, y los yn- 
dios, que nos ayudavan, de manera que ya estava hecha 
yglesia E casas, E casi la fortaleza. Estando en esto, pares^e 
ser ql gran montezuma tuvo noti§ia En mexico como le avian 



187 

preso sus rrecavdadores, E que le avian quitado la obedien- 
gia, y como estavan rrebelados los pueblos totonaques, mos- 
tro tener mucho Enojo de Cortes y de todos nosotros, y tenia 
ya mandado a vn su gran Exercito de guerreros, q viniesen 
a dar guerra a los pueblos q se le rrebelaron, y que no que- 
dase ninguno dellos a vida, E para contra nosotros, apare- 
jaba de venir con gran pujanza de capitanias, y En aquel 
ynstante van los dos yndios prisioneros q Cortes mando sol- 
tar segund E dicho en el capitulo pasado, y desque monte- 
zuma Entendio que Cortes les quito de las prisiones, y los 
enbio a mexico y las palabras de ofres§imientos q le Enbio 
a dezir quiso nro senor dios, q amanso su yra, E acordo de 
enbiar a saber de nosotros, y para ello vinieron dos sobrinos 
suyos, con quatro viejos, grandes Ca§iques, q los trayan a car- 
go, y con EUos Enbio vn presente de oro, y mantas, E a dar 
las gra9ias a cortes porque le solto a sus criados, y por otra 
parte, se Enbio a quexar mucho, diziendo que Con nro fa- 
bor se avian atrevido aquellos pueblos, de hazelle tan gran 
traygion, E q no le diesen tributo, E quitalle la obidiengia, 
E que agora teniendo rrespeto E a q tiene por §ierto q somos 
los q sus antepasados les an dicho q avian de venir a sus tie- 
rras E que devemos de ser de su linage, y porquestavamos 
En casas de los traidores no les Envio luego a destruir, mas 
quel tienpo andando, no se alabaran de aquellas tray5iones, 
y Cortes rres5ibio el oro y la rropa, q valia sobre dos mill 
pesos, les abra§o y dio por desculpa, ql y todos nosotros Era- 
mos muy amigos de su seiior montezuma, y Como tal servi- 
dor le tiene guardados sus tres rrecavdadores y luego los man- 
do traer de los navios y con buenas mantas y bien tratados 
se los Entrego, y tanbien Cortes se quexo mucho del monte- 
zuma y dixo, Como sus governadores pitalpitoque se fueron 
vna noche del rreal, sin le hablar y que no fue bien hecho, y 
que cree y tiene por ^ierto, q no se lo mandaria el sefior mon- 
tezuma q hiziesen tal villania, E q por aquella cavsa nos ve- 
nimos aqllos pueblos, donde Estavamos, E que Emos rres9e- 
bido dellos honrra, E que le pide por md que les perdone el 
desacato q Contra el an tenido y q En cuanto a lo q dize q 

Benal Dfai del Cftstillo.— 19. 



138 

no le acuden con el tributo, q no pueden servir a dos senores 
q En aquellos dias, q avemos estado nos an servido en non- 
bre de nro rrey y sefior, y porquel, Cortes y todos sus her- 
manos yriamos presto a le ver y servir, y desque alia estemos 
se dara orden En todo lo q mandare y despues de aques- 
tas pl?iticas y otras muchas que pasaron, mando dar aquellos 
mangebos q Eran grandes Cagiques y a los quatro viejos q 
los trayan a cargo, que eran honbres prin§ipales, diamantes 
azules y quentas verdes, y se les hizo honrra, y alii, delante 
dellos, porque avia buenos prados, mando Cortes que corrie- 
sen y escaramu§easen p® de alvarado, q tenia vna buena ye- 
gua alazana, q era muy rrebuelta, y otros cavalleros, de lo 
qual se holgaron de los haver visto correr y despedidos y muy 
contentos de Cortes y de todos nosotros se fueron a su mexi- 
co. En aquella sazon se le murio el cavallo a cortes y con- 
pro o le dieron otro, q se dezia el harriero, q Era castafio os- 
euro que fue de ortiz El musico y vn bartolome gargia el 
minero, y fue uno de los mejores cavallos q vinieron en el ar- 
mada, dexemos de hablar en esto y dire que como aquellos 
pueblos de la sierra nros amigos y el pueblo de genpoal solian 
estar de antes muy temerosos de los mexicanos creyendo quel 
gran montezuma los avia de enbiar a destruir con sus gran- 
des exergitos de guerreros, y desque vieron aquellos parien- 
tes del gran montezuma, q venian con el presente por mi me- 
morado y a darse por servidores de Cortes y de todos nosotros, 
estavan espantados y dezian vnos ca§iques a otros, q gier- 
tamente eramos tevles pues que montezuma nos abia mie- 
do, pues enbiava oro e presentes, y si de antes teniamos mucha 
rreputa5ion de esfor§ados, de alii adelante nos tuvieron En 
mucho mas y quedarse a aqui, E dire lo que hizo el cacique 
gordo y otros sus amigos. 



189 



CAPITULO XLVIX [XLIX] Como vino El 
cacique gordo E otros prin^ipales a que- 
xarse a cortes como en vn pueblo fuerte 
que se dezia ^ingapaqinga estavan guar- 
ni^iones de mexicanos y les hazian mucho 
dafio, y lo que sobrello se hizo. 

despues de despedidos los mensageros mexicanos, vino El 
cacique gordo con otros muchos prin^ipales, nros amigos, 
a dezir a cortes, q luego vaya a vn pueblo que se dize §inga- 
paQinga, questaria de genpoal dos dias de andadura, q serian 
echo o nueve leguas, porq dezian questavan En El juntos 
muchos yndios de guerra, de los culuas q se entiende por 
los mexicanos, e que les venian a destruir sus sementeras y 
estangias y les salteavan sus vasallos y les haziai;! otros 
muchos malos tratamientos, y cortes lo creyo, segun se lo de- 
zian tan afetuadamente y viendo aquellas quexas, y con tan- 
tas ynportuna9iones, y aviendoles prometido que les ayuda- 
ria y mataria a los culuas o A otros yndios que les quisiesen 
Enojar a esta cavsa no sabia q se dezir, salvo que yria de 
buena voluntad, o enbiaria algunos soldados con vno de nos- 
otros, para hechallos de alii, y estuvo pensando En ello y 
dijo rryendo a giertos conpafieros questavamos aconpanan- 
dole sabeys sefiores q me pares^e q En todas Estas tierras ya 
tenemos fama de Esforgados, y por lo que an visto Estas gen- 
tes, por los rrecavdadores de montezuma, nos tienen por dio- 
868 o por cosas como sus ydolos, E pensado, que para q crean 
q vno de nosotros basta para desbaratar aquellos yndios gue- 
rreros, que dizen q Estan En el pueblo de la fortaleza, sus 
enemigos, Enbiemos a Eredia El viejo q Era vizcayno y 
tenia mala Catadura en la cara y la barva grande y la cara 
medio acuchillada, E vn ojo tuerto, E coxo de vna piema y 



140 

Era escopetero, el qual le mando llamar, y le dixo, yd, Con 
Estos Ca§iques, hasta el rrio, questava de ally vn quarto de 
legua, y quando alia llegaredes, haze que os parays, a bever 
y lavar las manos, E tira vn tiro con vra Escopeta, que yo 
OS Enbiare a llamar, questo hago porque Crean que somos 
dioses, o de aquel nonbre y rreputagion q nos tienen puesto, 
y como vos soys mal agestado creeran que soys ydolo, y el 
Eredia lo hizo segund y de la manera que le fue mandado, 
porque era honbre bien entendido e avisado q abia sido sol- 
dado En ytalia, y luego en bio cortes a llamar a el ca§ique " 
gordo E a todos los mas pringipales questavan Aguardando 
el Ayuda y socorro y les dixo, alia Enbio con vosotros Ese 
mi hermano para q mate y heche todos los culuas dese pue- 
blo, y me traya presos a los q no se quisieren yr, y los caci- 
ques estavan Enlevados desque lo oyeron y no sabian si lo 
creer o no, e miravan a cortes si azia algun mudamiento en 
el rrostro, que creyeron q era verdad lo q les dezia, y luego 
El viejo heredia que yva con ellos, Carga su Escopeta, E yva 
tirando tiros al ayre por los montes porque lo oyesen e biesen 
los yndios y los cagiques Enbiaron a dar mandado a otros 
pueblos, Como llevaban a vn tevl, para matar a los mexica- 
nos, questavan En 9ingapa§inga, y esto pongo aqui por cosa 
de rrisa, porq vean las mafias q tenia cortes, y desq Enten- 
dio avria llegado El eredia al rrio que le avia dho, mando 
de presto que le fuesen a llamar y bueltos los ca§iques y el 
biejo Eredia les torno a dezir cortes a los cagiques, que por 
la buena voluntad que les tenia, quel propio cortes En per- 
sona, con alguno de sus hermanos queria yr a hazelles aquel 
socorro y a ver aquellas tierras y fortalezas, y que luego le 
truxesen ^ient honbres tamemes, para llevar los tepusqs q 
son los tiros, y vinieron otro dia por la manana, y aviamos 
de partir aquel mesmo dia con Cuatrogientos soldados, y ca- 
torze de cavallo, y vallesteros y escopeteros, questavan aper- 
gebidos, y giertos soldados q Eran de la par^ialidad de diego . 
Velasquez, dixeron q no querian yr, y q se fuese cortes, con 
los q quisiese, que Ellos a cuba se querian bolver y lo que 
sobre ello se hizo, dire adelante. 



141 



CAPITULO XLIX [L] Como giertos solda- 
dos de la par^ialidad de diego velasquez, 
viendo que de hecho queriamos poblar y 
comeiKjamos a paqificar pueblos, dixeron 
q no querian yr a ninguna Kntrada, sino 
bolverse a la ysla de cuba. 




) A me abran oydo dezir, En el capitulo antes deste que 
cortes avia de yr a vn pueblo q se dize §ingapa- 
9inga y avia de llevar consigo cuatrogientos solda- 
dos, y catorze de cavallo y vallesterosy escopeteros y tenian 
puestos En la memoria, para yr con nosotros, a §iertos sol- 
dados de la paryialidad de diego velasquez, e yendo los qua- 
drilleros aperyebillos, q saliesen luego Con sus armas y ca- 
vallos, los que los tenian, rrespondieron soberviam*® q no 
querian yr a ninguna Entrada sino bolverse a sus estan§ias 
y hagiendas q dexaron en cuba, q bastaba lo q avian perdi- 
do por sacallos cortes de sus Casas, y que les avia prometido 
En el arenal que qualquiera persona que se quisiese yr, que 
le daria li§en§ia y navio y matalotage, y a esta cavsa Esta- 
van siete soldados aper§ebidos para se bolver a cuba, y co- 
mo cortes lo supo, los Enbio a llamar, y preguntado por que 
hazian aquella cosa tan fea, y rrespondieron algo alterados, 
y dixeron q se maravillavan de su md querer poblar a don- 
de avia tanta fama de millares de yndios, y grandes pobla- 
zones, con tan pocos soldados como Eramos, y que Ellos es- 
tavan dolientes y hartos de andar de vna parte a otra, y que 
se querian yr a cuba a sus casas y haziendas, que les diese 
luego li§en9ia, como se lo avia prometido, y cortes les rres- 
pondio mazamente ques verdad, que se la prometio, mas q 



142 

no hazian lo que devian en dexar la vandera de su capitan 
desmanparada y luego lesmando que sin detenimiento nin- 
guno, se fuesen a Enbarcar y les sefialo navio y les mando 
dar ca§abi y vna botija de azeyte y otras legunbres de basti- 
mentos de lo que teniamos, y vno de aquellos soldados, q se 
dezia hulano moron, vezino de la villa de bayamo, tenia vn 
buen Cavallo obero, labrado de las manos, le vendio luego 
bien vendido, a vn juan rruano a trueque de otras haziendas 
quel juan rruano, dexava en cuba E yaquese querian hazer 
a la vela, fuymos todos los conpaneros Alcaldes y regidores 
de nra villa rrica a rrequerir a cortes que por via ninguna, 
no diese ligen^ia a ninguna persona, para salir de la tierra 
porq asi convenia al servigio de dios nro seiior y de su ma- 
gestad y que la persona q tal Ii5en5ia pidiese, le tuviese por 
honbre q meres§ia pena de muerte Conforme a las leyes de 
, lo militar, pues quieren dexar su capitan y vandera desman- 
parada en la guerra E peligro, En Especial aviendo tanta 
multitud de pueblos de yndios guerreros, como EUos an dho 
y Cortes hizo como que les queria dar la ligengia, mas a la 
postre se la rrevoco y se quedaron burlados y aun avergon- 
5ados y el moron su cavallo vendido, y el juan rruano q lo 
huvo, no se lo quiso bolver y todo Esto fue mandado por 
cortes y fuymos nra Entrada a gingapa^inga. 



143 



CAPITULO LI. lo que nos acaesqio en ^in- 
gapa^inga, y a la buelta q bolvimos por 
cenpoal les derrocamos sus ydolos y otras 
Cosas que pasaron. 




OMO ya los siete onbres q se querian bolver a Cuba, 
estavan pa§ificos, luego partimos, Con los solda- 
dos y cavalleros E ynfanteria ya por mi memora- 
da, y fuymos, a dormir al pueblo de ^enpoal, y tenian apa- 
rejado para salir con nosotros, dos mill yndios de guerra, en 
quatro Capitanias y El primero dia Caminamos ^inco leguas, 
Con buen con§ierto, y otro dia a poco mas de visperas, lle- 
gamos a las estangias questavan junto al pueblo de §ingapa- 
ginga, y los naturales del tuvieron notigia como ybamos E 
ya que Comengabamos a subir por la fortaleza, y casas ques- 
tavan entre grandes rriscos y penascos salieron de paz a nos- 
otros ocho yndios pringipales y papas y dizen a Cortes, llo- 
rando de los ojos, que por q les quiere matar y destruyr no 
aviendo hecho por q y pues tenemos fama q a todos hazia- 
mos bien, y desagraviamos a los questavan rrobados y avia- 
mos prendido a los rrecavdadores de montezuma, y que aque- 
Uos yndios de guerra de genpoal q alii yban Con nosotros, 
Estaban mal con ellos de Enemistades viejas, que avian teni- 
do sobre tierras e terminos, y q Con nro fabor les venian a 
matar y rrobar y ques verdad q mexicanos solian estar En 
guarnigion En aquel pueblo, y que pocos dias avia se avian 
ydo a sus tierras desq supieron que aviamos preso a otros rre- 
cavdadores, y que le rruegan q no pase mas adelante, la co- 
sa, y les favorezca, y desq Cortes lo ovo muy bien Entendido 
con nras lenguas, dona marina E aguilar luego Con mucha 



144 

brevedad, mando Al capitan pedro de alvarado, y al maestre 
de Campo q Era xpoual de oli, y A todos nosotros los con- 
paiieros que con ell ybamos, que detuviesemos a los yndios 
de §enpoal q no pasasen mas Adelante y ansi lo hizimos, y 
por presto q fuymos a detenellos, ya estavan rrobando En las 
estan§ias de lo qual ovo Cortes grande Enojo, y mando que 
viniesen luego los capitanes que trayan A cargo aquellos gue- 
rreros de genpoal, y con palabras de muy Enojado, y de gran- 
des amenazas, les dixo que luego les truxesen los yndios E 
yndias y mantas y gallinas que an rrobado En las estangias 
y q no Entre ninguno dellos En aquel pueblo y que porq le 
avian mentido y venian a sacrificar y rrobar a sus vezinos, 
Con nro favor, Eran dinos de muerte y q nro rrey y sefior, 
Cuyos vasallos somos, no nos Enbio A estas partes y tierras, 
para que hiziesen Aquellas maldades y que abriesen bien los 
ojos, no les Acontesgiese otra Como Aquella, porq no queda- 
ria honbre dellos Con vida. y luego los Cagiques y capitanes 
de genpoal truxeron A Cortes todo lo que avian rrobado, asi 
yndios Como yndias y gallinas y se les Entrego a los duenos 
Cuyo Era y con senblante muy furioso los torno a mandar 
que se saliesen A dormir Al canpo y ansi lo hizieron, y des- 
que los Caciques y papas de Aql pueblo, y otros Comarcanos 
vieron que tan justificados Eramos y las palabras Amorosas 
que Cortes les dezia, con nras lenguas y tanbien las Cosas 
tocantes A nra santa fee Como lo teniamos de costumbre y 
dexasen El sacrifigio, y de se rrobar vnos a otros, y las su- 
ziedades de sodomias y que no Adorasen sus malditos ydo- 
los y se les dixo otras muchas cosas buenas tomaronnos tan 
buena voluntad, que luego fueron a llamar A otros pueblos 
Comarcanos, y todos dieron la obidiencia a su magestad, y alii 
luego dieron muchas quexas del montezuma, como las pasa- 
das que avian dado los de genpoal, quando Estavamos En el 
pueblo de quiaviztlan, y otro dia por la manana Cortes man- 
do llamar a los Capitanes y cagiques de genpoal questavan 
En el canpo, aguardando para ver lo que les mandavamos 
y avn muy temerosos de Cortes por lo que avian hecho En 
averle mentido y venidos delante hizo Amistades Entre Ellos 



145 

y los de aquel pueblo que nunca falto per ninguno dellos y 
luego partimos para §enpoal por otro camino y pasamos por 
dos pueblos amigos de los de §ingapa§inga y estavamos des- 
cansando porque a5ia rrezio sol y veniamos muy Cansados, 
con las armas a cuestas y vn soldado q se dezia hulano de mo- 
ra, natural de cibdad rrodrigo, tomo dos gallinas, de vna easa 
de yndios de aquel pueblo, y Cortes que lo agerto a ver ovo 
. tanto Enojo de lo que delante del se hizo por aql soldado En 
los pueblos de paz en tomar las gallinas que luego le mando 
Echar vna soga A la garganta, y le tenian Ahorcado, si pe- 
dro de alvarado q se hallo junto de Cortes, que le Corto la 
soga Con el espada, y medio muerto qdo El pobre soldado. 
E querido traer Esto aqui a la memoria para que vean los cu- 
riosos letores y avn los sa^erdotes, que agora tienen cargo de 
administrar los santos sacramentos y dotrina A los natura- 
les destas partes, q porq aquel soldado tomo dos gallinas En 
pueblo de paz ayna le costara la vida y para que vean agora 
EUos de que manera se an de aber Con los yndios e no to- 
malles sus aziendas, despues murio Este soldado En vna gue- 
j rra. En la provin§ia de guatimala, sobre vn penol. bolvamos 
' a nra rrelagion, q como salimos de aquellos pueblos que de- 
xamos de paz, yendo para genpoal, Estavan El Ca§ique gordo 
con otros pringipales aguardandonos En vnas cho§as. Con co- 
mida, que avnq son yndios, vieron y Entendieron que la jus- 
tijia Es santa y buena, y que las palabras q cortes les abia dho 
que veniamos a desagraviar y quitar tiranias, C'onforma- 
va Con lo que paso En aqlla Entrada y tuvieronnos En mu- 
cho mas que de antes y alii dormimos En aquellas cho§as, y 
todos los Cagiques nos llevaron aconpafiando hasta los Apo- 
sentos de su pueblo, y verdaderamente quisieran q no salie- 
ramos de su tierra, porque se temian de montezuma no En- 
biase su gente de guerra Contra ellos, y dixeron a Cortes que 
pues eramos ya sus amigos, q nos quiere tener por herma- 
nos, q sera bien q tomasemos de sus hijas para hazer genera- 
tion y para q mas fixas sean las amistades, traxeron ocho 
yndias, todas hijas de Cagiques y dieron A Cortes vna de aque- 
llas cagicas y Era sobrina del cagique gordo, y otra dieron 

Bernal Dtax del CastiUo.— 20. 



146 

a alonzo hernandez puerto carrero y Era hija de otro gran 
ca§ique que se dezia Cuesco, en su lengua, y trayanlaa ves- 
tidas a todas ocho Con rricas Camisas de la trra, y bien 
ataviadas a su vsan§a y cada vna dellas vn collar de oro Al 
euello y En las orejas 9arcillos de oro, y venian Aconpafia- 
das de otras yndias, para se servir dellas, y quando El Caci- 
que gordo, las presento dixo a Cortes tecle, que quiere dezir 
En su lengua sefior, estas siete mugeres, son para loe car 
pitanes que tienes y esta qs mi sobrina, Es para ti, ques se- 
fiora de pueblos, y vasallos, cortes la rres§ibio Con alegre 
senblante, y les dixo que se lo tenian En md mas para to- 
mallas, como dize, y q seamos hermanos que hay ne9esidad 
q no tengan aquellos ydolos En que creen y adoran q los 
traen Enganados, y que no les sacrifiquen mas anymas y que 
como El vea aquellas cosas malisimas En el suelo y q no sa- 

• crifican, que luego ternan con nosotros muy mas fixa la Er- 

• mandad, y que aquellas mugeres que se bolveran xpianas 
primero q las res9ibamos y que tanbien avian de ser linpios 
-de sodomias, porq tenian muchachos vestidos En avitos de 
mugeres q andavan a ganar En aquel maldito ofi^io, y cada 
dia sacrificavan delante de nosotros tres o quatro o §inco yn- 
dios y los cora§ones ofres§ian a sus ydolos y la sangre pega- 
ban por las paredes y cortavanles las piernas y los bra§08 y 
muslos y lo comian como vaca, q se traen de las came^erias 
En nra tierra, y avn tengo creydo que lo vendian por menu- 
do en los tianguez, que son mercados, y que Como estas mal- 
dades se quiten, y q no lo vsen, que no solamente le seremos 
amigos, mas que les hara q sean senores de otras provin9ias, 
y todos los caciques, papas y prin9ipales rrespondieron que 
no les estava bien dexar sus ydolos y sacrifi9ios, y q aquellos 
sus dioses les davan salud, y buenas semen teras, y todo lo que 
avian menester, y que En quanto a lo de las sodomias, 
que pornan rres9isten9ia En ello, para q no se vse mas, y co- 
mo cortes y todos nosotros vimos aquella rrespuesta tan des- 
acatada, y aviamos visto tantas crueldades y torpedades, ya 
por mi otra vez dichas, no las pudimos sufrir. Enton9es nos 
hablo Cortes sobrello y nos truxo a la memoria vnas buenas 



147 

y muy sanctas dotrinas, y q como podiamos hazer ninguna 
Cosa buena, si no bolviamos por la honrra de dios y En qui- 
tar loe sacrifiQios q hazian A los ydolos, y questuviesemos 
muy aper^bidos para pelear, si nos viniesen a defender que 
no 86 los derrocasemos y q avnque nos Costase las vidas En 
aquel dia avian de venir Al suelo, y puesto questamos todos 
muy a punto, con nras armas como lo teniamos de Costun- 
bre para pelear, les dixo cortes a los Caciques que los avian 
de derrocar y desq aqllo bieron luego mando El casique gor- 
do a otros sus Capitanes, que se apergibiesen muchos guerre- 
ros En defensa de sus ydolos, y desq queriamos subir En vn 
Alto Cu, ques su adoratorio questava alto y avia muchas gra- 
das, q ya no se me Acuerda q tantas eran vino El cagique 
gordo con otros pringipales muy alborotados y safiudos, y 
dixeron a cortes q por q les queriamos destruir y q si les ha- 
ziamos desonor a sus dioses o se los quitavamos que todos 
EUos pere^erian y avn nosotros con ellos, y cortes les rres- 
pondio muy Enojado que otras vezes les a dho q no sacrifi- 
quen aqllas malas figuras, porq no les traygan mas Enga- 
fiados y q a esta cavsa los veniamos a quitar de alii, E que 
luego a la ora los quitasen Ellos, si no que los hechariamos 
a rrodar por las gradas abajo y les dixo, que no los ternia- 
mos por amigos sino por Enemigos mortales, pues q le da 
buen Consejo y no lo quieren creer y porq a visto q an ve- 
nido sus capitanias puestos En armas de guerreros, questa 
Enojado dellos y que se lo pagaran co quitalles las bidas, y 
desque bieron a cortes q les dezia aquellas amenazas, y nra 
lengua dofia marina que se lo sabia muy bien dar a enten- 
der y avn les amenazava con los poderes de montezuma, que 
cada dia los aguardava, por temor desto dixeron, q Ellos no 
Eran dinos de llegar a sus dioses y q si nosotros los qriamos 
derrocar, que no era con su Consentimiento, que se los de- 
rrocasemos, o hiziesemos lo que quisiesemos y no lo ovo bien 
dho quando subimos sobre ginquenta soldados y los derroca- 
mos y vienen rrodando aquellos sus ydolos hechos peda^os, 
y Eran de manera de dragones espantables tan grandes co- 
mo bezerros y otras figuras de manera de medio honbre y de 



148 

perros grandes y de malas semexangas, y quando asi los vie- 
ron hechos peda§os los ca^iqs y papas q con Ellos estavan Ho- 
ravan y taparon los ojos y en su lengua totonaq les dezian 
que les perdonasen, y que no Era mas En su mano, ni tenian 
Culpa, sino Esos tevles que os derruecan E que por temor 
de los mexicanos no nos davan guerra y quando aquello pa- 
80, Comengavan las capitanias de los yndios guerreros q E 
dho q venian a darnos guerra, a querer flechar y desq aqllo 
vimos Echamos mano Al cacique gordo, y a seys papas y a 
otros prin§ipales y les dixo Cortes q si hazian algun desco- 
medimiento de guerra q abian de morir todos Ellos, y luego 
El ca§ique gordo mando a sus gentes que se fuesen de delan- 
te de nosotros, y q no hiziesen guerra y desque Cortes los 
vio sosegados, les hizo vn parlamento, lo qual dire adelante y 
ansi se apa§iguo todo, y esto de gingapaginga fue la primera 
Entrada que hizo cortes En la nueva espafia, y fue de arto 
provecho y no como dize El coronista gomara, q matamos y 
prendimos y asolamos tantos millares de honbres, En lo de 
9ingapa§inga y miren los Curiosos questo leyeren, quanto va 
de lo vno a lo otro, por muy buen estilo que lo dize En su co- 
ronica, pues En todo lo quescrive, no pasa Como dize— 



CAPITULO LI I. Como cortes mando hazer 
vn altar y se puso vna ymagen de nra se- 
nora, y vna cruz, y se dixo misa y se bav- 
tizaron las ocho yndias. 




CMC ya Callavan los Caciques y papas y todos los 
mas prin9ipales, mando cortes q a los ydolos q 
derrocamos, hechos peda§os q los Uevasen a donde 
no pares§iesen mas y los quemasen y luego salieron de vn 



149 

aposento ocho papas, q tenian Cargo dellos, y toman bus ydo- 
los y los llevan A la misma casa donde salieron, e los qma- 
ron £1 abito que trayan aquellos papas, eran vnas mantas 
prietas a manera de sotanas y lobas largas hasta En pies y 
vnos oomo capillos que qrian paresger a los q traen los ca- 
DonigoB y otros capillos trayan mas chicos como los que traen 
los dominicos, y trayan £1 cavello muy largo hasta la ginta 
y avn algunos hasta los pies llenos de sangre pegada y muy 
enrretrados, que no se podian £sparzir y las orejas hechas 
pedagos, sacrificadas dellas, y hedian como afufre y tenia 
otro muy mal olor como de came muerta, y segund dezian, 
e alCan^abamos a saber, aquellos papas Eran hijos de prin- 
gipales y no tenian mugeres, mas tenian £1 maldito ofigio 
de sodomias, y ayunavan ^iertos dias y lo que yo les via co- 
mer Eran vnos meollos o pepitas del algodon quando lo 
desmotan, salvo si el los no comian otras cosas q yo no se 
las pudiese ver. dexemos a los papas y bolvamos A cortes 
que les hizo vn muy buen rrazonamiento, Con nras lenguas 
dona marina y geronimo de aguilar, y les dixo, que agora 
les terniamos Como a Ermanos, y que les fabores^eria En 
todo lo que pudiese contra motezuma y sus mexicanos, por- 
que ya Enbio A mandar q no les diesen guerra, ni les Ue- 
basen tributo y q pues En aquellos sus altos cues, no avian 
de tener mas ydolos, que El les quiere dexar vna gran seno- 
ra, ques madre de nro sefior Jesuxpo En quien creEmos y 
adoramos para q Ellos tanbien la tengan por sefiora y abo- 
gada, y sobrello, y otras cosas de platicas que pasaron se les 
hizo vn muy buen rrazonamiento, y tan bien propuesto para 
segun £1 tienpo, que no avia mas que dezir, y se les decla- 
ro muchas cosas tocantes a nra fe, tan bien dhas, Como ago- 
ra los rreligiosos se lo dan A Entender de manera que lo 
cyan de buena boluntad y luego les Mando llamar todos los 
yndios albafiires que abia En aquel pueblo y traer mucha 
Cal para que lo adere^asen y mando que quitasen las Cos- 
tras de sangre questavan En aqiiellos cues, y que lo adere^a- 
sen muy bien, y luego otro dia, se Encalo y se hizo vn altar 
con buenas mantas, y mando traer muchas rrosas de las na- 



150 

turales, que avia En la tierra, q Eran bien olorosas, y mu- 
chos rramos y lo mando Enrramar y que lotuviesen linpio 
y barrido, A la contina y para que tuviesen Cargo dello 
aperQibio A quatro papas, que se tresquilasen El cavello q 
los trayan largos, Como otra vez E dho, E que vistiesen man- 
ias blancas e se quitasen las que trayan y que sienpre andu- 
yiesen linpios, E que sirviesen aquella santa ymagen de nra 
senora en barrer y Enrramar, y para que tuviesen mas Car- 
go dello, puso a vn nro soldado coxo e viejo que se dezia 
juan de torres de cordova questuviese alii por ermitafio, E 
que mirase que se hiziese Cada dia Ansi Como lo mandava 
a los papas y mando A nros Carpinteros otras vezes por 
mi nonbrados, que hiziesen vna cruz y la pusiese En vn pi- 
lar que teniamos ya nuevamente hecho e muy bien Encala- 
do y otro dia de mafiana, se dixo misa En el altar, la qual 
dixo el padre fray br°^ de olmedo, y Entonges a la misa, se 
dio orden Como con El Ensensio de la tierra, se Ensensasen, 
la santa ymagen de nra sefSora, E a la santa Cruz, y tanbien 
se les mostro a hazer candelas de la (era de la tierra, y se 
les mando que Con aquellas Candelas, sienpre tuviesen ar- 
diendo delante del altar, porq hasta Entonges no sabian 
Aprovecharse de la §era, e a lamisa Estuvieron los mas prin- 
(ipales Caciques de aquel pueblo, y de otros q se avian jun- 
tado y ansi mismo se traxeron las ocho yndias para voluer 
xpianas que todavia Estavan En poder de sus padres y tios 
y se les dio a Entender, que no avian mas de sacrifioar ni 
adorar ydolos, salvo que avian de creer En nro sefior dios y 
se les amonesto muchas cosas tocantes a nra santa fee y se 
. babtizaron y se Uamo a la sobrina del Ca^iq gordoj dofia Ca- 
» talina y Era muy fea, Aquella dieron a cortes, por la mano 
y El la rres§ibio Con buen senblante. A la hija de Cuexco 
que Era vn gran Ca§ique, se puso nonbre dofia fran^isca, 
Esta Era muy hermosa, para ser yndia, y la dio Cortes Alon- 
so hernandez puerto carrero, las otras seys ya no se me Acuer- 
da El nonbre de todas mas se que Cortes las rrepartio Entre 
soldados y despues de hecho esto, nos despedimos de todos 
los Cagiques y prin§ipales, y dende En adelante, sienpre noB 



161 

tuvieron muy buena voluntad, Espegialmente desque vieron 
que rres^ibio cortes sua hijas y las Uevamos Con nosotros y 
Con grandes ofresfimientos que Cortes les hizo, que les ayu- 
daria, nos fuymos a nra villa rrica y lo que alii se hizo lo 
dire adelante. Esto es lo que paso, En este pueblo de ^en- 
poal, y no otra Cosa que sobre EUo ayan Escrito, el gomara 
ni los demas coronistas q todo es burla E tranpas 



CAPITULO LI II. Como boluimos a nra vi- 
lla rrica, de la vera cmz, y lo q alii paso. 




ESPUES que ovimos hecho Aquella Jornada y que- 
daron Amigos los de (ingapa^inga Con los de ^en- 
poal, y otros pueblos Comarcanos dieron obidien- 
gia A su magestad, y se derrocaron los ydolos y se puso la 
ymagen de nra sefiora y la santa cruz, y se puso por Ermi- 
tano El viejo soldado, y todo lo por mi memorado nos fuy- 
mos a la villa, y llevavamos Con nosotros, giertos pringipa- 
les de Qenpoal y hallamos que aquel dia avia venido de la 
ysla de cuba vn navio y por Capitan del vn fran~ de savze- 
do, que llamavamos El polido y pusimosle aquel nonbre 
porque En demasia se pre^iaba de galan y polido, y dezian 
que avia sido mastresala del almirante de castilla, y Era na- 
tural de medina rruyseco, y vino Enton§es luys marin Ca- 
pitan que fue En lo de mexico, persona que valio mucho, y vi- 
nieron diez soldados, y traya El savsedo vn cavallo y luys 
mayin vna yegua y nuevas de cuba, que le avian llegado de 
Caatilla, A diego velasquez las provissiones para poder rres- 
catar y poblar y los amigos de diego velasquez, se rrego^ija- 
ron mucho, y demas de que supieron que le truxeron pro- 
vision para ser Adelantado de Cuba y estando En aquella 
villa, sin tener En q Entender, mas de Acabar de hazer la 



152 

fortaleza, que todavia se Entendia En ella, diximos A cor- 
tes todos los mas soldados que se quedase aquello questava 
becho En ella para memoria pues estava ya para Enmade- 
rar y que avia ya mas de tres meses questavamos En aque- 
Ua tierra, E que seria bueno yr a ver que Cosa Era El gran 
montezuma, y buscar la vida y nra ventura, E que antes q 
nos metiesemos En camino, Enviasemos a besar los pies A 
su magestad y a dalle cuenta y rrela^ion de todo lo acaes^i- 
do desde q salimos desde la ysla de cuba, y tanbien se puso 
En platica, q Enviasemos a su mag todo El oro que se avia 
avido ansi rrescatado Como los presentes q nos Enbio mon- 
tezuma y rrespondio Cortes, que Era muy bien Acordado, 
E que ya lo avia El puesto En platica Con giertos cavalle- 
ros, E porque En lo del oro, por ventura abria algunos sol- 
dados que querran sus partes y si se partiese, que seria poco 
lo que se podria Enbiar por Esta cavsa dio Cargo A diego de 
ordas, y a frangisco de montejo que Eran personas de nego- 
§ios, que fuesen de soldado En soldado, de los q se tuviese 
sospecha q demandarian las partes del oro, y les dezian Es- 
tas palabras, sefiores ya veys que queremos hazer vn presen- 
te a su m. del oro que aqui Emos avido, y para ser El pri- 
mero que Enbiamos de estas tierras, avia de ser mucho mas, 
pares^enos q todos le sirvamos con las partes que nos caben, 
los cavalleros y soldados, que aqui Estamos escritos, tenemos 
firmados Como no queremos parte ninguna dello sino q ser- 
vimos a su magestad Con ello porq nos haga mds, El que 
quisiere su parte no sele negara. El que no laquisiere haga 
lo que todos Emos hecho, firmelo aqui, y desta manera to- 
dos a vna lo firmaron, y esto hecho, luego se nonbraron, pa- 
ra procuradores que fuesen a castilla, alonzo hernandez puer- 
to Carrero, y a frangisco de montejo, porq ya cortes le abia 
dado sobre dos mill pesos, por tenelle de su parte, y se man- 
do apergebir El mejor navio de toda la flota y Con dos pilo- 
tos, q fue vno anton de alaminos, q sabia como abian de 
desenbocar por la canal de baAma, porql fue El primero, 
que navego por aquella canal, y tanbien Apercibimos quin- 
ze marineros y se les dio todo rrecavdo de matalotage y Esto 



158 

Aper§ebido Acordamos de Escrevir y hazer saber A su mag, 
todo lo acaesQido, y Cortes Escrivio por si, segund El nos 
dixo, con rreta rrelagion, mas no vimos su carta y El cabil- 
do Escrivio, juntamente Con diez soldados, de los que fiiy- 
mos En q se poblase la tierra, y le al^amos a cortes por ge- 
neral y con toda verdad, q no falto Cosa ninguna En la carta, 
y va yo firmado En Ella y demas Destas Cartas y rrela^iones 
todos los Capitanes y soldados juntam** Escreuimos otra car- 
ta y rrelajion, y lo que se contenia, En la carta q Escrivi- 
mos Es lo sgte. 



CAPITULO LIIIL de la rrelacjion E carta, 
que Escrivimos a su magestad, Gon nros 
procuradores Alonso hernandez puerto Ca- 
rrero, E francisco de montejo, la qual carta 
jrva firmada de algunos capitanes y solda- 
dos. 




ESPUES de poner en el prin§ipio aquel muy debido 
acato q somos obligados a tan gran mag del Enpe- 
rador nro senor, que fue ausi s. c. c. R. m. y poner 
otras Cosas q se convenian dezir En la rrelagion y Cuenta 
de nra vida E viaje, Cada Capitulo por si, fue Esto, q aqui 
dire En suma breve, Como salimos desde la ysla de Cuba, Con 
fernando Cortes, los pregones q se dieron, Como veniamos A 
poblar, y que diego Velasqz secretamente Enbiava A rresca- 
. tar y no a poblar. Como Cortes se queria bolver Con 9ierto 
oro rrescatado, Conforme a las ynstruc5iones q de diego Ve- 
lasquez traya, de las quales hizimos presenta9ion, Como hi- 
. zimos a Cortes q poblase y le nonbramos por Capitan gene- 
. ral E Justicia mayor hasta que otra cosa su mag fuese servido 

Bemal Dlas del CutUlo.— 21. 



164 

mandar, Gomo le prometimos El quinto de lo q se ovieee, 
despues de sacado su rreal quinto. Como Uegamos a Cozu* 
mel, y por q ventura se ovo geronimo de aguilar En la pun- 
ta de Cotoche y de la manera q dezia, que alii Aporto El E 
vn gongalo guerrero, q se quedo Con los yndios, por estar Ca- 
sado y tener hijos y Estar ya hecho yndio. Como Uegamos 
A tabasco, y de las guerras q nos dieron y batalla q Con EUos 
tuvimos, Como los atraximos de paz. Como adoquiera que 
allegamoSy se les hazen buenos rrazonamientos para q dexen 
BUS ydolos y se les declara las Cosas tocantes a nra santa fee, 
Como dieron la obidiengia A su rreal mg, y son los primeros 
vasallos que tiene En aquestas partes. Como truxeron vn 
presente de mugeres y En El vna Ca5ica, para yndia, de mu- 
cho ser, q sabe la lengua de mexico, ques la que se vsa En 
toda la tierra, E q Con Ella y con El aguilar tenemos ver- 
daderas lenguas. Como desEnbarcamos En san juan de vlua 
y de las platicas de los Enbaxadores del gran montezuma, y 
quien Era El montezuma y lo q se dezia de sus grandezas 
y del presente q truxeron y como fuymos a genpoal, ques vn 
pueblo grande y desde alii a otro pueblo q se dize quiaviz- 
tlan, questava En fortaleza, y como se hizo liga y confedera- 
tion Con nosotros, y quitaron la obidiengia a montezuma 
En aquel pueblo, demas de treynta pueblos, que todos le die- 
ron la obidienfia y estan En su rreal patrimonio, la yda de 
f ingapazinga, como hizimos la fortaleza, y q agora Estamos 
En Camino para yr la tierra adentro hasta vernos con El 
montezuma. Como aquesta tierra Es muy grande y de mu- 
chas §ibdades y muy pobladisimas y los naturales grandes 
guerreros. Como Entre Ellos ay muchas diversidades de len- 
guas, y tienen guerra vnos Con otros. Como son ydolatras y 
se sacrifican y matan En sacrifi9ios muchos honbres E ninoe 
•y mugeres y Comen Came vmana, E vsan otras torpedades. 
Como El primer descubridor, fue vn fran?® hernandez de Cor- 
dova, E luego Como vino juan de grijalva, E q agora al pre- 
sente le servimos Con El oro q Emos avido, ques El sol de 
oro y la luna de plata, y vn caxco de oro En granos, Como 
se coge de las minas, muchas diversidades y generos de pie* 



165 

qoB de oro hechas de muchas maneras, y mantas de algodon 
muy labradas de plumas y primas, y otras muchas pie^as De 
oro q fueron mosqueadores, rrodelas, E otras Cosas q ya no 
se me Acuerda como a ya tantos aflos q paso. tanbien En- 
biamos quatro yndios q quitamos En 9enpoal, q tenian A 
Engordar En vnas jablas de madera, para despues de gordos 
sacrificallos y comerselos, y despues de hecha Esta rrela- 
fion E otras cosas dimos quenta y rrelagion como quedamos 
En Estos sus rreynos, quatrogientos y ginquenta soldados, En 
muy gran peligro, Entre tanta multitud de pueblos, E gen- 
tes belicosas y grandes guerreros, por servir A dios y a su 
rreal corona, y le suplicamos q En todo lo q se nos ofre5iese, 
no6 haga mds, y q no hiziese md de la govemagion de estas 
trras ni de ningunos ofigios rreales a persona ninguna, por- 
que son tales y rricas y de grandes pueblos y gibdades, que 
convienen para vn ynfante o gran sefior y tenemos pensa- 
miento q Como don juan rrodriguez de fonseca obispo de 
burgos, y argobispo de rosano, Es su presidente y manda a 
todas las yndias que lo dara Algund su debdo, o amigo, Es- 
pegialmente a vn diego velasqz, questa por governador En 
la ysla de cuba, y la cavsa porque se la dara la govemagion 
V otro qualquier Cargo Es q sienpre le sirve Con presentes 
de oro y le a dexado. En la misma ysla, pueblos de yndios, 
q le sacan oro de las minas, de lo qual avia primeramente 
de dar los mejores pueblos para su rreal Corona, y no le de- 
xo ningunos que solamente por Esto Es dino de q no se le 
hagan mergedes y q como En todo somos sus muy leales ser- 
vidores, y hasta feneger nras vidas le Emos de servir se lo 
hazemos saber para q tenga notigia de todo, y questamos de- 
terminados q hasta q sea servido, q nros procuradores, q alia 
Enbiamos besen sus rreales pies, y vea nras cartas y nosotros 
veamos su rreal firma q Entonges los pechos por tierra, pa- 
ra obedeger sus rreales mandos y que si El obispo de burgos, 
por su mandado nos Enbia a qualquier persona a govemar 
o a ser Capitan, q primero q se obedezca, se lo haremos saber 
a su rreal persona adoquiera que estuviere, y lo que fuere ser- 
vido mandar que lo obedegeremos, Como mando de nro rrey 



156 

y sefior, Como somos obligados, y demas destas rrela^iones, 
le suplicamos, q Entre tanto q otra cosa sea servido mandar 
q le hiziese md de la govema^ion a fernando Cortes y dimes 
tantos loores del, y tan gran servidor suyo hasta ponelle En 
las nuves, y despues de aver Eserito todas Estas rrela^iones, 
Con todo El mayor acato y vmilldad, que podimos y Conve- 
nia, y Cada Capitulo por si, declarando Cada Cosa, como y 
quando y de q arte, pasaron como Carta para nro rrey y se- 
fior, y no del arte q va aqui. En Esta mi rrela^ion, y la fir- 
mamos todos los Capitanes y soldados, q Eramos de la parte 
de Corties, E fueron dos Cartas duplicadas y nos rrogo que 
se las mostrasemos y Como vio la rrelayion tan verdadera y 
-losgrandes loores, q del davamos, ovo mucho plazer y dixo 
^ q nos loHienia En md Con grandes ofreajimientos q nos hi- 
zo, Enpero no quisiera, q En Ella dixeramos, ny mentara- 
' mos del quinto del oro q le prometimos, ni que declararamos 
. quien fueron los primeros descubridores, porq segund Enten- 
dimos, no hazia En su carta rrela§ion de fran?® hernandez 
. de Cordova, ni del grijalva, sino del solo a quien atribuya 
-r El descubrimiento, la honrra E onor de todo, y dixo q Agora, 
al presente que aquello Estuviera mejor por Escrevir y no 
'. dar rrelagion dello a su mag, y no falto quien le dixo, q a 
* . nro rrey y sefior q no se le a de dexar de dezir todo lo q pasa, 
pues ya Escritas Estas cartas y dadas a nros procuradores, 
les Encomendamos mucho que por via ninguna, no Entra- 
sen En la Avana, ni fuesen a vna Estanjia q tenia alii. El 
fran?^ de montejo, q se dezia El marien que Era puerto pa 
nabios porq no Alcangase a saber diego velasquez lo q psava, 
y no lo hizieron ansi, Como adelante dire, pues ya puesto 
todo a punto para se yr A Enbarcar dixo misa El padre de 
la md y EnComendandoles Al espiritu santo, q les guiase y 
En veynte y seys dias del mes de Jullio de mill E quinien- 
tos diez y nueve afios, partieron de san juan de vlua, y Con 
buen tienpo Uegaron a la abana, y El fran§isco de montejo 
Con grandes ynportunagiones conboco E atraxo Al piloto 
Alaminos, guiase A su EstanQia diziendo q yva a tomar bas- 
timento de puercos y cagabi, hasta q le hizo hazer lo q qui- 



157 

80 y fue a surgir a su Estangia, porq El puerto carrero yva 
muy malo y no hizo quenta del y la ndche q alii Uegaron 
desde la nao Echaron vn marinero En tierra Con cartas y 
avisos, para El diego vela^uez, y supimos ql montejo le man- 
do q fiiese c6 las Cartas, y En posta fue El marinero por la 
ysla de cuba, de pueblo En pueblo publicando todo lo por 
mi Aqui dho, hasta q diego velasqz lo supo, y lo q sobrello 
hizo, Adelante lo dire. 



CAPITULO LV. Como diego velasquez, 
governador de Cuba, supo por Cartas muy 
de ^ierto q Enbiavamos procuradores, Con 
Enbajadas y presentes A nro rrey y senor 
y lo q sobrello se hizo. 




OMO diego velasqz, governador de Cuba, supo las 
nuevas ansi por las Cartas q le Enbiaron secretas 
y dixeron q fueron del montejo Como del marine- 
ro, q se hallo presente En todo lo por mi dicho En El Ca- 
pitulo pasado, q se avia Echado A nado para le llevar las 
cartas y quando Entendio del gran presente de oro q En- 
biavamos a su mag, y supo quienes Eran los Enbaxadores E 
procuradores, tomavale tras sudores de muerte y dezia pala- 
bras muy lastimosas, E maldigiones Contra Cortes y su se- 
cretario duero, y del contador amador de lares, q le aconse- 
jaron En Azer general al Cortes, y de presto mando Armar 
dos navios de poco porte, grandes veleros. Con toda la arti- 
Ueria y soldados q pudo aver y con dos Capitanes, q fueron 
En Ellos, q se dezian grabiel de rrojas y El otro Capitan se 
dezia hulano de guzman y les mando q fuesen hastp. la Aba- 
na y desde alii a la Canal de bahama, y que En todo Caso 



158 

le truxesen presa la nao En q yvan nros procuradores, y to- 
do El oro q llevavan, y de presto ansi Como lo mando He- 
garon En ^iertos dias de navega^ion a la canal de bahama y 
preguntavan a los de los barcos que andavan por la mar de 
Acarreto, q si avian visto yr vna nao de mucho porte y to- 
dos davan notigia della y que ya seria desenbocada por la 
Canal de bahama, porq sienpre tuvieron buen tienpo, y des- 
pues de andar barloventeando Con aquellos dos nabios, En- 
tre la canal y la Abana, y no hallaron rrecavdo de lo q ve- 
nian A buscar, se bolvieron a Santiago de Cuba y si triste 
Estaba El diego velasquez de antes q Enbiase los navios, 
muy mas se congoxo desq los vio bolver de aquel arte, y lue- 
go le aconsexaron sus amigos, q se Enbiase A quexar A Es- 
pafia Al obispo de burgos, questava por presidente de yndios 
y hazia mucho por El, y tanbien Enbio a dar sus quexas a 
las yslas de santo domingo A la avdiencia rreal, q En Ella 
rresidia, y a los frayles geronimos, questavan por governa- 
dores En Ella q se dezian fray luys de figueroa, y fray Alon- 
so de Santo domingo, y fray bernaldino de manganedo los 
quales rreligiosos solian Estar y rresidir En El monasterio 
de la mejorada quea dos leguas de medina del canpo, y En- 
bian En posta vn nabio a darles muchas quexas de Cortes y 
de todos nosotros y como alcan9aron a saber nros grandea 
servigios, la rrespuesta q le dieron los frayles gt^ fue q 
cortes y los q con El andavamos En las guerras no se nos 
podia poner Culpa pues sobre todas cosas ocurriamos A nro 
rrey y senor, y le Enbiamos tan gran presente, q otro comLO 
El no se a visto de muchos tienpos pasados En nra Espafia, 
y Esto dixeron, porq En aql tienpo y sazon, no avia piru ni 
memoria del, y tanbien le Enbiaron A dezir, q antes Era- 
mos dinos q su mag nos hiziese muchas mds y Enton^es le 
Enbiaron al d^ belasqz A Cuba A vn lijenjiado q se dezia 
fuago para q le tome rresidengia o al menos avia pocos me- 
ses q avia AUegado a la ysla, y El mismo li§en9iado dio rre- 
la^ion a los frayles geronimos, y Como aquella rrespuesta le 
truxeron Al diego velasqz se Congoxo mucho mas, y como 
de antes Era muy gordo se puso flaco, En aquellos dias y 



159 

luego Con gran diligengia manda buscar todoe los navios q 
pudo aver En la ysla de Cuba y apergebir soldados y capi- 
tanes £ procuro Enbiar vna rrezia armada para prender A 
Cortes y a todos nosotroe y tanta diligengia puso quel mig- 
mo En persona, andava de villa En villa y En vnas Estan- 
gias y En otras y escrebia a todas las partes de la ysla donde 
el no podia yr A rrogar A sus amigos fuesen Aquella Jorna- 
da, por manera q En obra de onze meses o vn afio allego 
diez y ocho velas grandes y chicas y sobre mill y tresgientos 
soldados, Entre Capitanes y marineros porque como le vian 
tan Apasionado y corrido, todos los mas pringipales vezinos 
de Cuba, Ansi sus parientes como los q tenian yndios se 
aparejaron para le servir y tanbien Enbio por Capitan gene- 
ral de toda la Armada, a vn ydalgo q se dezia panfilo de 
narvaez, honbre alto de cuerpo, y menbrudo, y hablava al- 
go Entonado, como medio de boveda, y Era natural de va- 
lladolid y Casado En la ysla de Cuba con vna duefia ya bev- 
da que se llama va maria de valenguela, y tenia buenoe pueblos 
de yndios y Era muy rrico, donde lo dexare agora haziendo 
y aderegando su armada y bolvere a dezir de nros procura- 
dores, y su buen viaje, y porq En vna sazon acontegian tres 
y quatro Cosas no puedo seguir la rrelagion y materia de lo 
que voy hablando, por dejar de dezir lo que mas viene al 
proposito, y a Esta cavsa no me culpen porq salgo y me apar- 
to de la orden, por dezir lo q mas adelante pasa. 



CAPITULO LVL Como nros procuradores 
Con buen tienpo desEnbocaron, la canal 
de bahama, y En pocos dias Uegaron A 
castilla, y lo que En la Corte les avino. 

ya E dho que partieron nros proCuradores, del puerto de san 
juan de vlua, En seys dias del mes de jullio de mill E qui- 
nientos y diez y nueve afios, E con buen viaje Uegaron A la 



160 

Abana, y luego desEnbocaron la Canal, E dizque aquella fue 
la primera vez que por alii navegaron y En poco tienpo lle- 
garon a las yslas de la terfera y desde alii A sevilla y fueron 
En posta a la corte questava En valladolid y por presidente 
del rreal consejo de yndias don juan rrodriguez de fon5eca, 
que Era obispo de burgos y se nonbrava Ar5obi8po de rrosa- 
no y mandava toda la Corte porquel Enperador nro sefior 
Estava En flandes y como nros procuradores le fueron a be- 
sar las manos al psidente muy ufanos creyendo q les hiziera 
mds. y a dalle nras cartas y rrela^iones y a presentar todo 
El oro y joyas y le suplicaron que luego hiziese mensagero 
a su magestad y le Enbiasen aquel presente y cartas, y que 
EUos mesmos yrian Con Ello a besar los rreales pies y porq 
se lo dixeron le mostro tan mala cara y peor voluntad, y avn 
les dixo palabras mal miradas que nros Enbaxadores estu* 
vieron para le rresponder, de manera q se rreportaron y di- 
xeron q mirase su senoria los grandes servigios q cortes y sus 
conpafieros haziamos A su magestad y que le suplicaban 
otra vez q todas aquellas joyas de oro y cartas y rrela5iones 
las Enbiase luego a su magestad y pa que sepa lo que ay, y 
q Ellos yrian con El, y les torno a rresponder muy sober- 
viamente y avn les mando que no tuviesen Ellos cargo dello, 
q El escribiria lo q pasaba, y no lo que le dezian, pues se 
avian levantado contra El diego velasquez y pasaron otras 
muchas palabras agras y En esta sazon llego a la Corte El 
benito min, Capellan de diego velasquez, otra vez por mi 
nonbrado dando muchas quexas de cortes y de todos nosotros, 
de q El obispo se ayro mucho mas contra nosotros, y porq 
El alonso hernandez puerto Carrero Como Era Cavallero 
primo del conde de medellyn, porql montejo estavase a la 
mira y no osaba desagradar al psidente, y dezia Al obispo 
q le suplicava muy ahincadam^ q sin pasion fuesen oydos 
y q no dixese las palabras Como dezia y q luego Enbiase 
aqllos rrecavdos, ansi Como los trayan A su magestad, y q 
eramos muy bu" servidores de la rreal Corona, y dinos de 
mds. y no de ser por palabras afrentados, y desq aquello oyo 
El obispo, le mando Echar preso y porq le ynformaron q 



161 

avia sacado de medellin, tres anos avia, a vna muger y la 
Uevo a las yndias, por manera q todos nros sui^s y presentes 
, de oro, Estavan del arte que aqui E dho, y acordaron nros 
' enbaxadores de callar hasta su tienpo e lugar y El obispo 
Escrivio a su magestad a flandes En fabor de su privado e 
. amigo diego velasquez y muy malas palabras contra Cortes 
y contra todos nosotros, y no hizo rrelagion de las cartas que 
• le Enbiavamos, salvo q se avia Aljado hernando cortes, al 
diego velasquez e otrais cosas q dixo. bolvamos A dezir del 
alonso hernandez puerto Carrero y del fran*? de montejo y 
avn de martin cortes, padre del mismo Cortes y de vn ligen- 
jiado nunez rrelator del rreal consejo de su magestad, y cer- 
cano pariente de cortes q azian por el, acordaron de Enbiar 
mensagero a flandes Con otras cartas como las q dieron al 
obispo, porq venian duplicadas las q enviamos Con los pro- 
curadores, y escrivieron A su magestad todo lo que pasava, 
e la memoria de las joyas de oro del presente y dandoqxas 
.del obispo y descubriendo sus tratos q tenia Con el diego 
velasquez, y avn otros cavalleros les faboresgieron, q no es- 
tavan muy bien con el don juan rrodriguez de fonseca porq 
segun dezian Era mal quisto, por muchas demasias y sober- 
vias que mostrava con los grandes cargos q tenia, y como 
nros grandes sui^s son por dios nro senor y por su magestad, 
' y sienpre poniamos nras fuergas En ello, quiso dios q su ma- 
/.gestad lo alcan§o a saber muy claram*? y desq lo vio y En- 
' tendio, fue tanto El contentam^ q mostro, y los duqs y mar- 
qses y condes y otros cavalleros qstavan En su rreal corte, 
q En otra cosa no hablaban por algunos dias sino de cortes 
•y de todos nosotros los que le ayudamos en las conquistas y 
las rriquezas q destas partes le Enbiamos y ansi por las car- 
tas glosadas q sobrello le Escrivio El obispo de burgos, desq 
vio su magestad que todo Era al contrario de la verdad, des- 
;de alii adelante le tubo mala boluntad al obispo en espe§ial- 
-mente q no Enbio todas las piegas de oro e se qdo con gran 
parte dellas, todo lo qual alcan§o a saber El mesmo obispo 
q se lo Escrivieron desde flandes, de lo qual rresgibio muy 
grande Enojo, y si de antes q fuesen nras cartas ante su ma- 

Bernal Dlas del CastiUo.— 22. 



162 

gestad, el obispo dezia muchos males, de cortes y de todos 
nosotros, desde alii adelante, A boca llena nos llamava de 
traydores, mas quiso dios perdio la furia y braveza, q desde 
ay a dos afios fue rrecusado, y avn qdo Corrido y afrentado 
y nosotros qdamos por muy leales suidores como adelante 
dire q venga a coyuntura, y escrivio su magestad q presto 
vernia A castilla y Entenderia En lo q nos conviniese E nos 
haria mds, y porq adelante lo dire muy por estenso, Como 
y de q manera paso, se qdara aqui, Ansi q nros proeurado- 
res, aguardando la venida de su mag y antes q mas pase ade- 
lante quiero dezir por lo q me an preguntado §iertos cava- 
lleros muy curiosos y avn tienen rrazon de lo saber, q como 
puedo yo escrebir En esta rrelagion lo que no vy pues esta- 
ba en aqlla sazo En las conquistas de la nueba espana, 
quando nros procuradores dieron las cartas y rrecavdos y 
presentes de oro q Uebavan para su mag, y tuvieron aque- 
• lias contiendas con el obispo de burgos. A esto digo, q nros 
, procuradores nos escribian a los verdaderos conquistadores 
"- lo q pasava, ansi lo del obispo de burgos, como lo q su mag 
fue servido mandar En nro fabor, letra por letra, En capitu- 
los y de q manera pasava y cortes nos Enbiava otras cartas 
q rres§ebia de nros procuradores A las villas donde biviamos 
En aqlla sazon, para q viesemos quan bien nego^iavan con 
su mag y quan contrario teniamos Al obispo y esto doy por 
descargo de lo q me preguntavan dexemos esto, y digamos 
En otro capitulo lo q En nro rreal paso. 



168 



CAPITULO LVII. Como despues que par- 
tieron nros Enbaxadores para su mag con 
todo El oro y cartas y rrelaQiones lo q En 
el rreal se hizo, y la just? q cortes mando 
hazer. 

dende a quatro dias q partieron nros procuradores, para yr 
antel Enperador nro sefior, como dho avemos, y los cora§o- 
nes de los honbres son de mucha calidades, e pensamientos, 
paresge ser q vnos amigos y criados del diego velasquez, que 
se dezian pedro Escudero, E vn juan yermefio, E vn gon§a- 
lo de vnbria, piloto, E vn bernaldino de coria, vezino q fue 
despues de chiapa, padre de vn hulano genteno E vn clerigo 
que se dezia juan diaz, y fiertos honbres de la mar q se de- 
zian pefiates, naturales de gibraleon, estavan mal con cortes, 
los vnos porq no les dio lie? para se bolver A cuba, quando 
se la avia prometido, y otros porq no les dio parte del oro q 
Enbiamos a castilla, los pefiates porq les a9oto En cozumel, 
como otra vez E dho En el capitulo ^ quando hurtaron los 
tozinos A vn barrio, acordaron todos de tomar vn navio de 
poco porte E yrse con el A cuba, A dar mandado Al diego 
velasquez para Avisalle como En la Abana podian tomar En 
la estangia de fran^ de montejo, A nros procuradores, Con 
el oro y rrecavdos, q segun pares§io q de otras personas 
questavan En nro rreal, fueron Anconsejados, q fuesen Aque- 
Ua Estan9ia, y avn escrivieron para quel diego velasquez, tu- 
viese tienpo de abellos a las manos, por manera q las personas 
q E dho, ya tenian metido matalotaje, que Era pan Cagabi 
y azeyte y pescado y agua y otras provezas de lo q podian 
Aber, E ya q se y van A Enbarcar y Era A mas de media no- 
che, El vno dellos q Era El bernaldino de coria, pares§e ser 

1 Hay un espado en bianco en el original. 



164 

se arrepintio de se bolver A cuba, lo fue A hazer saber A 
Cortes, y como lo supo, E de que manera y quantos E por q 
cavsas se querian yr y quien fueron En los consejos y tra- 
mas para ello les mando luego sacar las velas e aguja y ti- 
mon del navio, y los mando hechar presos y les tomo sus 
confisiones y confesaron la verdad y condenaron, A otros 
questavan con nosotros, q se disimulo, por el tienpo, q no 
permitia otra cosa, y por senten§ia q dio mando Ahorcar Al 
pedro Escudero, E a juan 5ermeno y cortar los pies Al ^ pi- 
loto gongalo de vnbria y a§otar a los marineros penates, A 
cada dozientos Azotes y el padre juan diaz si no fuera de mi- 
sa tanbien le castigaran mas meteole harto temor. Acuerdome 
que quando cortes firmo aqlla senia, dixo con grandes sospi- 
ros y sentimientos, o quien no supiera Escrevir, por no firmar 
muertes de honbres, y pares§eme que aqueste dho Es muy co- 
mun Entre juezes que senten^ian Algunas personas A muerte, 
q tomaron de aquel cruel neron fin el tienpo que dio muestras 
de buen Enperador, E ansi como se ovo Esecutado la senia se 
fue cortes luego, a matacavallo, a §enpoal q son 9inco leguas de 
la villa y nos mando q luego fuesemos tras El dozientos sol- 
dados y todos los de cavallo, y acuerdome que pedro de al- 
varado, q abia tres dias que le abia Enbiado cortes con otros 
dozientos soldados por los pueblos de la sierra, porque tuvie- 
sen que comer, porque en nra villa pasabamos mucha nes- 
§esidad de bastimentos y le mando que se fuese a ^enpoal 
para que alii dariamos orden de nro viaje para mexico por 
manera, quel pedro de alvarado no se hallo presente quan- 
do se hizo la justigia que dho tengo, y desque nos vimos 
todos juntos En genpoal, la orden que se dio En todo dire 
adelante. 

1 Hay un espacio en bianco en el original. 



166 



CAPITULO LYIIL como acordamos de yr 
a mexico, y antes que partiesemos dar to- 
dos los navios Al trabez y lo que mas pa- 
so, y Esto de dar con los navios al trabes 
fue por consejo E acuerdo de todos nos- 
otros los que Eramos amigos de cortes. 




iSTANDO En 9enpoal Como dho tengo platicando 
Con cortes En las Cosas de la guerra, y camino q 
teniamos por delante, de platiea En platica le acon- 
sejamos los que Eramos sus amigos, y otros ovo eontrarios, 
que no dexase navio ninguno En el puerto, sino que luego 
diese al traves con todos, y no quedasen Enbara§os porque 
Entretanto questavamos En la tierra Adentro, no se al^asen 
otras personas como los pasados, y demas desto, que ternia- 
mos mucha Ayuda, de los maestres y pilotos y marineros q 
serian Al pie de gient personas, E q mejor nos ayudarian a 
belar y a guerrear, que no estar En el puerto, y segun, En- 
tendi Esta platica, de dar con los navios al traves, q alli le 
propusimos, El mismo cortes lo tenia ya con§ertado, sino qui- 
80 q saliese de nosotros, porq si algo le demandasen q paga- 
sen los navios, q Era por nro Consejo, y todos fuesemos En 
los pagar, y luego mando a vn juan descalante, q Era algua- 
zil mayor y persona de mucho valor, E gran Amigo de Cortes 
y Enemigo del diego velasqz, porq En la ysla de Cuba no 
le dio buenos yndios, q luego fuese A la villa, y q de todos 
los navios, se sacasen todas las Anclas, y cables, y velas y lo 
q dentro tenian, de q se pudiesen aprovechar y q diese con 
todos ellos al trabes, q no qdasen mas de los bateles E que los 
pilotos y maestres viejos, y marineros q no Eran para yr a la 



' 166 

grra q se qdasen En la villa, y con dos chinchorros, q tubie- 
sen cargo de pescar, q En aquel puerto sienpre abia pescado, 
y avnq no mucho, y El ju*^ descalante, lo hizo eegund y de 
la manera q le fue mandado, y luego se vino A 9enpoal con 
vna capitania de honbres de la mar q fueron de los q saco de 
los navios y salieron algunos de ellos muy buenos soldados, 
pues hecho esto, mando Cortes Uamar A todos los cajiques 
de la serrania de los pueblos nros confederados, y rebelados 
al gran montezuma y les dixo, como abian de servir a los q 
quedaran En la villa rrica, E Acabar de hazer la yglesia y 
fortaleza, y casas y alii delante dellos tomo Cortes por la ma- 
no al juan descalante y les dixo, este Es mi hermano, E lo 
q les mandase, q lo hiziesen E q si oviere menester fabor y 
ayuda contra algunos yndios mexicanos, q a el ocurriesen 
ql yria En persona A les ayudar y todos los Ca§iques se ofre- 
§ieron de bu^ boluntad de hazer lo que les mandase. Acuer- 
dome q luego le savmaron Al juan descalante con sus yn- 
Qiensos, y avnq no quiso. ya E dho era persona muy bastante 
para qualquier Cargo, E amigo de cortes y con aqlla confian- 
za le puso En aquella villa y puerto por capitan, para si algo 
Enbiase diego velasquez q oviere rresisten§ia y dexallo E 
aqui y dire lo q paso. | Aqui Es donde dize El coronista go- 
mara, q quado cortes mando barrenar los navios q no lo osa- 
va publicar A los soldados q queria yr A mexico. En busca 
del gran montezuma no paso como dize, pues de q Condi- 
5ion somos los espanoles, para no yr Adelante, y estarnos En 
partes q no tengamos provecho e gerras, tanbien dize El mis- 
mo gomara que pedro de yr9io quedo por capitan. En la ve- 
ra cruz no le ynformaron bien, q digo que juan descalante, 
fue El que quedo por capitan, E algua9il mayor de la nueva 
espafia, que avn al pedro de yr§io no le avian dado Cargo 
ninguno, ni avn de cuadrillero. 



167 



CAPITULO LVIIII. De vn rrazonamiento 
que, Cortes nos hizo despues de aver da- 
do con los navios al traves y [como] Apres- 
tavamos nra yda para mexico — 




ESPUES de aver dado Con los navios Al traves, A 
ojos vistas y no como lo dize El coronista gomara, 
vna manana despues de aver oydo misa, Estando 
questavamos todos los capitanes y soldados juntos hablando 
Con cortes En cosas En lo militar dixo que nos pedia por 
md que le oyesemos, y propuso vn rrazonamiento desta ma- 
nera q ya aviamos Entendido la Jornada que y vamos, y q 
mediante nro seiior Jesuxpo aviamos de venser todas las ba- 
tallas y rreEncuentros, y que aviamos destar prestos para 
ello como convenia, porq En qualquier parte donde fuesemos 
desbaratados, lo qual dios no permitese, no podriamos aljar 
cabe§a por ser muy pocos, y q no teniamos otro socorro ni 
Ayuda, sino El de dios porq ya no teniamos navios para yr 
a Cuba, salvo nro buen pelear y coragones fuertes y sobre 
Ello dixo otras muchas conpara§iones y hechos Eroycos de 
los rromanos, y todos a vna le rrespondimos q Ariamos lo q 
ordenase que hechada estaba la suerte de la buena ventura, 
como dijo Julio gesar sobre El rrubicon, pues Eran todos nros 
svigios, para servir a dios y a su magestad. y despues de este 
rrazonamiento, que fue muy bueno, §ierto con otras palabras 
mas melosas y Eloquengia, q no yo aqui las digo, y luego 
mando llamar al cagique gordo y le torno a traer A la memo- 
ria que tuviesen muy rreveren§iada y linpia la yglesia E 
cruz, y demas desto le dixo, quel se queria partir luego para 
mexico, A mandar A montezuma que no rrobe, ni sacrifi- 
que, E que a menester dozientos yndios tamemes para lie- 



168 

var El artilleria, que ya E dho otra vez, que llevan dos Arro- 
vas A cuestas, E andan Con ellas 9inco leguas y tanbien le 
demando ginquenta prin§ipales, honbres de guerra que fue- 
sen con nosotros.=Estando desta manera para partir vino 
de la villa rrica vn soldado con vna carta del juan descalan- 
te, que ya le avia mandado cortes que fuese a la villa para q 
leEnbiase otros soldados y lo que En la carta dezia el esca- 
lanta era que andava vn navio por la costa, y q le abia he- 
cho ahumadas, y otras grandes senas y avia puesto vnas man- 
tas blancas, por vanderas y que cavalgo a cavallo con vna ca- 
pa de grana colorada porq le viesen los del navio y q le 
pares§io a el que bien vieron las sefias y banderas y cavallo, y 
capa y no quisieron venir Al puerto, y que luego Enbio es- 
panoles, a ver En q paraje y va el nabio y q le truxeron rres- 
puesta, q tres leguas de alii estava surto gerca de vn rrio, y 
que se lo haze saber, para ver lo que manda. y como Cortes 
vio la carta, mando luego a p'^ de alvarado q tuviese cargo 
de todo El Exergito, questava alii En §enpoal y juntamente 
con el a gongalo de sandoval que ya dava muestras de varon 
muy esforgado como sienpre lo fue y este fue el primer car- 
go q tuvo el sandoval y avn por le aver dado aquel cargo y se 
le dexo de dar Al- de abila, tu vieron giertas cosquillas, El 
Al- de abila y el sandoval, y luego cortes cabalgo con quatro 
de cavallo, q le aconpanaron, y mando que le siguiesemos 
^inquenta soldados, de los mas sueltos q cortes alii nos non- 
bro los q aviamos de yr con El, y aqlla noche llegamos a la 
villa rrica y lo q alii pasamos se dira adelante 



169 



CAPITULO LX. Como cortes fue a donde 
Estava surto El navio y prendimos seys 
soldados y marineros, que del navio ovi- 
mos, y lo q sobrello paso — 



^^} 




fNSI como llegamos a la billa rrica, Como dho ten- 
go bino ju^ descalante A hablar A cortes y le dixo 
q seria bien yr luego aqlla noche al navio, por 
Ventura no algase belas e se fuese, y q rreposase el cortes, 
quel yria con veynte soldados, y cortes dixo, q no podia rre- 
posar, q cabra coxa no tenga siesta, q El qria yr En persona 
Con los soldados q consigo traya, y antes q bocado comiese- 
mos, Comen§amos a caminar, la costa adelante, y topamos en 
el Camino a quatro espafioles, que venian a tomar posesion 
En aquella trra, por fran^ de garay, governador de xamay- 
ca los quales Enbiava vn capitan qstava poblado En el rrio 
de panuco, que se llamava alonso alvarez, pineda o pinedo, 
y los quatro Espafioles q tomamos se dezian guillen de la 
loa, Este venia por escrivano y los testigos que traya para 
tomar la posesion se dezian andres nufiez y Era carpintero 
de rribera y el otro se dezia mastre p^ el de la Arpa y Era 
valengiano. El otro no me acuerdo El nonbre, y desque Cor- 
tes ovo bien Entendido como venian a tomar posesion En 
nonbre de fran^isco de garay y supo q quedava En xamay- 
ca y Enbiava capitanes, preguntoles, cortes q por q titulo, o 
por que via venian aquellos capitanes, y rrespondieron los 
quatro honbres, q En el ano de mill y quinientos y diez y 
ocho Como avia fama En todas las yslas de las tierras q des- 
cubrimos quando lo de frangisco hernandez de cordova, E 
juan de grijalva y Uevamos a cuba los veynte mill pesos de 
oro a diego velasqz, q Enton§es tuvo rrelagion el garay del 

Bernal Diss del Ca8tmo.~r28. 



170 

piloto anton de alaminos y de otro piloto que aviamos traydo 
Con nosotros, q podia pedir a su magestad desde el rrio de 
san pedro y san pablo, por la banda del norte, todo lo que 
descubriese y como el garay tenia En la corte quien le fabo- 
resfia, q Era el obispo de burgos y el li^engiado §apata, y el 
secretario conchillos con El fabor q Esperava Enbio vn su 
mayordomo q se dezia torralva, a lo nego§iar y truxo provi- 
siones para q fuese adelantado y governador desde El rrio de 
san pedro y san pablo, y de todo lo q descubriese y por 
aqllas provisiones Enbio luego tres navios con hasta dozien- 
tos y setenta soldados, con bastimentos y cavallos, con El 
capitan por mi memorado, que se dezia Al^ Alvarez pineda 
o pinedo y questava poblado En vn rrio q se dize de panu- 
CO, obra de setenta leguas de alii y qllos hizieron lo q su 
capitan les mando, E que no tiene culpa, y desque lo ovo 
Entendido cortes, con palabras amorosas les alago, y dixo q 
si podriamos tomar aquel navio y el guillen de la loa q Era 
el mas principal de los quatro honbres dixo q capearian y 
harian lo que pudiesen y por bien que los llamaron y capea- 
ron ni por senas q les hizieron, no quisieron venir, porq se- 
gund dixeron aquellos honbres, su capitan les mando, que 
mirasen que los soldados de cortes, no topasen con Ellos, 
porq tenian notigia questavamos en aqlla trra y desque vi- 
mos que no venia El batel, bien Entendimos, que desde el 
navio nos avian visto venir por la costa adelante y que si no 
Era Con mafia, no bolverian con El batel aquella tierra y 
rrogoles cortes q se desnudasen aquellos quatro honbres sus 
vestidos, para que se vistiesen otros quatro de los nros E an- 
si lo hizieron y luego nos bolvimos por la costa adelante por 
donde abiamos venido, para q nos biesen bolver y creye- 
sen los del navio, que de hecho, nos bolvimos y quedavamos 
los quatro de nros soldados, vestidos los vestidos de los otros 
quatro y Estuvimos con cortes En el monte Escondidos has- 
ta mas de media noche, q se puso la luna E hizo Escuro, 
para bolvernos Enfrente del rriachuelo, como nos bolvimos 
y muy Escondidos, q no paresgiamos otros sino los quatro 
soldados de los nros que E dho y desq amanesgio, comenga- 



171 

ron A capear los quatro soldados y luego vinieron En el batel 
seis marineros, y los dos saltaron En tierra, A henchir dos 
botijas de agua y Entonges aguardamos los que entrabamos 
CO cortes escondidos, que saltasen los demas y no quisieron 
saltar En trra y los quatro de los nros, que tenian vestidos 
de las rropas de los otros de garay, hazian que se Estavan 
lavando las manos y escondiendo las caras E rrostros y de- 
zian los del batel venios A Enbarcar q aseys, por q no ve- 
nis y Enton§es rrespondio vno de los nros salta En tierra E 
vereys aqui vn po§o y como descono§ieron En la boz se bol- 
vieron con su batel y por mas que les llamaron no quisieron 
rresponder y queriamos les tirar con las Escopetas y balles- 
tas, y cortes dixo q no se hiziese tal, q se fuesen con dios a 
dar mandado a su capitan por manera que se ovieron de 
aquel navio seys soldados los quatro q ovimos primero y dos 
marineros que saltaron en trra y ansi nos bolvimos A la vi- 
lla rrica, y todo esto sin comer cosa ninguna, y esto es lo q 
se hizo, y no como lo escrive'El coronista gomara, porq dice 
que vino garay En aquel tienpo, y no fue asi que prime- 
ro que viniese Enbio tres capitanes con navios, lo qual dire 
adelante En que tienpo vinieron E que se hizo dellos, E tan- 
bien En el tienpo que vino garay, y pasemos adelante y di- 
re como acordamos de yr a mexico. 



CAPITULO LXL como acordamos de yr a 
la qibdad de mexico, y por consejo del Ca- 
cique fuymos por tascala, y de lo que nos 
acaesQio, ansi de rrencuentros de gerra co- 
mo otras cosas q nos avinieron. 

despues de bien considerada la partida para mexico, toma- 
mos consejo sobre el camino q abiamos de llevar, y fue acor- 
dado por los prin§ipales de 9enpoal quel mejor y mas convi- 



172 

niente camino era per la provingia de tascala porque eran 
8US amigos y mortales Enemigos de mexicanos, y ya tenian 
aparejados quarenta prin§ipales, y todos honbres de guerra 
que fueron con nosotros y nos ayudaron mucho En aquella 
Jornada, y mas nos dieron dozientos tamemes para Uevar El 
artilleria, que para nosotros los pobres soldados, no aviamos 
menester ninguno porque En aquel tienpo, no teniamos que 
llevar porq nras Armas, ansi lan^as como escopetas, y va- 
llestas, y rrodelas y todo otro genero dellas, con ellas dor- 
miamos, E caminabamos y calgados nros alpargates q era 
nro cal9ado, y como E dho, sienpre muy apergebidos pa- 
ra pelear y partimos de §enpoal de mediado El mes de agosto 
de mill e quinientos y diez y nueve aiios y sienpre Con muy 
buena orden y los corredores del canpo, y 5iertos soldados 
muy sueltos, delante y la primera Jornada fuemos a vn pue- 
blo, que se dize xalapa, y desde alii a socochima y estaba 
bien fuerte y mala Entrada, y En el avia muchas parras de 
vbas de la trra y En estos pueblos se les dixo, con dona mari- 
na y geronimo de aguilar nras lenguas, todas las cosas tocan- 
tes a nra santa fe, y como Eramos vasallos del Enperador don 
carlos, E que nos Enbio para quitar, que no aya mas sacri- 
fi§ios de honbres, ni se rrobasen vnos a otros y se les declare 
muchas cosas que se Convenian dezir y como Eran amigos 
de los de §enpoal, y no tributavan A montezuma, Allavamos 
En ellos buena voluntad, y nos davan de comer y se puso En 
cada pueblo vna cruz, y se les declaro lo que sinificava E q 
la tuviesen En mucha rreveren9ia, y desde sochima pasamos 
vnas altas sierras y puerto y llegamos A otro pueblo que se 
dize tejutla E tanbien hallamos En ellos buena voluntad, 
porque tanpoco davan tributo a mexico, como los demas, y 
desde aquel pueblo acabamos de subir todas las sierras y En- 
tramoa En el despoblado, donde hazia muy gran frio y gra- 
nizo y llovio aquella noche tuvimos falta de comida, y venia 
vn biento de la sierra nevada, questava a vn lado, que nos 
hazia tenblar de frio, porq como aviamos venido de la ysla 
de Cuba E de la villa rrica y toda aquella costa es muy ca- 
lurosa, y entramos en tierra fria y no teniamos con q nos abri- 



178 

gar sino con nras Armas sentiamos las Eladas como Eramos 
Acostunbrados a diferente tenple y desde AUi pasamos a otro 
puerto donde hallamos vnas caserias y grandes adoratorios 
de ydolos, que ya E dho que se dizen Cues y tenian grandes 
rimeros de lefia para El 8ervi9io de los ydolos, questavan En 
aquellos adoratorioSi y tanpoco tuvimos que comer, y azia 
rrezio frio y desde alii Entramos En tierra de vn pueblo que 
se dize 90cotlan y Enbiamos dos yndios de genpoal A dezilles 
al Ca5iq como yvamos, que tuviesen por bien nra Uegada a 
sus cas. y Era subjeto de mex^, y siempre caminavamos muy 
aperQebidos, y con gran Con^ierto, porq viamos, que ya Era 
otra manera de tierra, y desde que vimos blanquear Afoteas 
y las casas del cacique y los Cues y adoratorios que Eran 
muy altos y Encalados, pares^ian muy bien, como algunos 
pueblos de nra espana, y pusimosle nonbre, castil bianco, 
porq dixeron vnos soldados Portugueses, que paresgia A la 
villa de castil bianco de portugal, y ansi se llama agora, y 
como supieron En aquel pueblo, por los mensajeros q Enbia- 
mos, como ybamos salio El cagique a rre§ibirnos con otros 
prin9ipales, junto a sus casas El qual cacique se llamaba olin- 
tecle y nos llebaron a vnos aposentos y nos dieron de comer 
poca cosa, E de mala voluntad, y desq ovimos comido cortes 
les pregunto, con nras lenguas, de las cosas de su senor mon- 
tezuma, y dixo de sus grandes poderes de guerreros que te- 
nia En todas las provin^ias sus subjetas, sin otros muchos 
Exercitos que tenia En las fronteras y provinyias comarca- 
nas, y luego dixo de la gran fortaleza de mexico y como es- 
tavan fundadas las casas sobre agua, y q de vna casa a otra 
no se podia pasar, sino por puentes q tenian hechos, y En 
canoas y las casas todas de afoteas y En cada aQotea si que- 
rian poner manparos. Era fortalezas, y que para Entrar den- 
tro En su gibdad, que avia tres calgadas y En cada calga- 
da quatro o 9inco aberturas, por donde pasaba El agua, de 
vna parte a la otra En cada vna de aquella abertura, avia vna 
puente y con al^ar qualquiera dellas, q son hechas de made- 
ra, no pueden Entrar En mex~, y luego dixo del mucho oro 
y plata y piedras chalchivis, y rriquezas q tenia montezuma 



174 

q nunca acabava de dezir otras muchas cosas de quan gra 
sefior Era q cortes y todos nosotros, estabamos 9dinirados de 
lo oyr, y con todo quanto contavan su gran fortaleza y puen- 
tea, como somos de tal calidad los soldados espanoles quisie- 
ramos ya Estar provando ventura y avnque nos pares5ia cosa 
ynposible segud lo sefialaba y dezia El olintecle y verdade- 
ramente, Era mex^ muy mas fuerte y tenia mayores pertre- 
chos de albarradas q todo lo que dezia porque vna cosa es 
averlo visto, la manera y fuer§as q tenia, que no como lo es- 
crivo, y dixo q Era tan gran senor montezuma, q todo lo q 
queria senoreava, y q no sabia si seria contento desq supiese 
nra estada alii, En aquel pueblo, por nos aber aposentado y 
dado de comer sin su lic^ y cortes le dixo con nras lenguas 
pues hagos saber, q nosotros venimos de lexos trras, por man- 
dado de nro rrey y senor ques El enperador don carlos de 
quien son vasallos muchos y grandes sefiores y Enbia a man- 
dar a Ese vro gran montezuma, que no sacrifique ni mate 
nyngunos yndios, ni rrobe sus vasallos, ni tome nyngunas 
trras, y para que de la obidiengia a nro rrey y sefior, y ago- 
ra lo digo ansi mesmo a vos, olintecle y a todos los mas ca- 
§iques q aqui estays, que dexeys vros sacrifi§ios, y no comays 
carnes de vros proximos ni agais sodomias, ni las cosas feas 
q soleys hazer, porq ansi lo manda nro sefior dios ques El 
que adoramos y creEmos y nos da la vida, y la muerte y nos 
a de llevar A los §ielos, y se les declaro otras muchas cosas, 
tocantes a nra santa fe y ellos A todo callavan y dixo cortes 
a los soldados q alii nos hallamos, pares§eme, sefiores, que 
ya q no podemos hazer otra cosa, sino que se ponga vna cruz, 
y rrespondio El padre fray br™* de olmedo pares§eme sefior 
q En estos pueblos no es tienpo para dexalles cruz en su po- 
der, porq son desvergon§ados, y sin temor y como son vasa- 
llos de montezuma no la quemen o hagan alguna cosa mala 
y esto q se le a dho basta, hasta q tengan mas Conocim^ de 
nra santa fe, y ansi se quedo sin poner la cruz. dexemos esto 
y de las santas amonesta§iones y digamos q como llevava- 
mos vn.lebrel de gran cuerpo, q Era de fran?® de lugo y.la- 
drava mucho de noche, pares§e ser, preguntavan aquellos ca- 



175 

piques del pueblo A los amigos q trayamos de §enpoal, que 
si Era tigre o leon o cosa con que matavamos los yndios, y 
rrespondieron traenlo para quando algu® los Enoja los mate 
y tanbien les preguntaron q aquellas lonbardas que traya- 
mos q hazian con ellas y rrespondieron q con vnas piedras q 
metiamos dentro dellas matavamos A quien queriamos y 
q los cavallos q corrian como benados, y q alcan§avamos con 
ellos a quien les mandavamos, y dixo el olintecle y los de- 
mas prin§i pales, luego de esa man era, tevles deben de ser, ya 
E dho otras vezes, q a los ydolos o sus dioses, o cosas malas, 
Uamaban tevles y rrespondieron nros amigos, pues como ago- 
ra los veys, por eso mira no hagais cosa con q les deys Enojo 
que luego lo sabran, que saben lo que teneys en el pensa- 
m? porqstos tevles son los que prendieron a los rrecavdado- 
res de vro gran montezuma, y mandaron que no le diesen 
mas tributos En todas las sierras, ni En nro pueblo de §en- 
poal y otros son los q nos derrocaron de nros cues, nros tev- 
les, y pusieron los suyos, y an ven§ido los de tavasco, y chan- 
poton y son tan buenos q hizieron Amistades Entre nosotros 
y los de cingapasinga, y demas desto, ya Abreys visto co- 
mo El gran montezuma, avnq tiene tantos poderes, les enbia 
oro y mantas, y agora An venido a este nro pueblo, y veo q 
no les days nada^ anda presto y traedles algun presente, por 
manera q trayamos con nosotros, buenos hechacuervos porq 
luego truxeron quatro pinjantes y tres collares y vnas lagar- 
tijas, y todo de oro, y avnque Era muy baxo, y mas truxe- 
ron quatro yndias que fueron buenas, para moler pan, y vna 
carga de mantas. Cortes los rres9ibio con alegre boluntad y 
con grandes ofrecim^s. Acuerdome que tenian En vna plaga, 
a donde Estavan vnos adoratorios, puestos tantos rrimeros 
de calabernas de muertos que se podian contar segund El 
congierto, como estavan puestas q al paresger q serian mas de 
cien mill, y digo otra vez sobre gient mill, y En otra parte 
de la plaga Estavan otros tantos rremeros de 9acarrones, hue- 
sos de muertos, q no se podian contar y tenian en vnas vi- 
gas, muchas cabegas colgadas de vna parte a otra, y estavan 
guardando aquellos huesos y calavernas tres papas, que se- 



176 

gun Entendimos tenian cargo dellos, de lo qual tubimos q 
mirar, mas despues que Entramos bien la trra adentro, En 
todos los pueblos estavan de aqlla manera e tanbien y En lo 
de tascala, pasado todo esto q aqui e dho, acordamos de yr 
nro camino, por tascala, porq dezian nros amigos, estavan 
muy Qerca y q los terminos Estavan alii juntos donde tenian 
puestos por sefiales vnos moxones, y sobre Ello se pregunto 
al ca§ique olintecle, q qual Era mejor camino y mas llano 
para yr a mexico, y dixo q por vn pueblo muy grande q se 
dezia cholula y los de §enpoal dixeron a cortes senor no va- 
yas por cholula, q son muy traydores, y tiene alii sienpre 
montezuma, sus guarnigiones de guerra y q fuesemos por tas- 
cala q Eran sus amigos y Enemigos de mexicanos y ansi 
Acordamos de tomar El consejo de los de §enpoal que dios 
lo Encaminava todo, y cortes demando luego al olintecle, 
veynte honbres prin§ipales guerreros, que fuesen con noso- 
tros y luego nos los dieron, y otro dia de maiiana fuymos ca- 
mino de tascala y llegamos a vn poblezuelo, q Era de los de 
xalagingo, y de alii Enbiamos por mensageros dos yndios 
de los prinjipales de §enpoal De los que solian dezir muchos 
bienes, y loas de los tascaltecas y que eran sus amigos y les 
Enbiamos vna carta, puesto que sabiamos que no la Enten- 
derian, y tanbien vn chapeo de los bedejudos, colorados de 
flandes, que Enton§es se vsaban, y lo que se hizo, diremos 
adelantc 



177 



CAPITULO LXIL como se determino que 
fuesemos por tascala y les Enbiavamos men- 
sageros para que tuviesen por bien nra yda 
por su tierra, y como prendieron a los 
mensageros y lo que mas se hizo — 




OMO salimos de castilblanco y fuymos por nro ca- 
mino, los corredores del canpo sienpre Adelante, 
E muy bien apers^ebidos, E gran congierto, los 
escopeteros y ballesteros, como convenia, y los de a caballo, 
mucho mejor, y sienpre nras armas bestidas como lo tenia- 
mos de Costunbre. dexemos desto, que no se para que gasto 
mas palabras sobrello, sino questavamos tan apersgebidos an- 
si de dia como de noche, q si diesen alarma diez ve§es En 
aquel punto, nos hallaran muy prestos, y con aquesta orden 
llegamos a vn poblezuelo de xala§ingo y alii nos dieron vn 
collar de oro, y vnas mantas y dos yndias, y desde aquel 
pueblo Enbiamos dos mensageros, pringipales de los de §en- 
poal, a tascala, con vna carta, y con vn chapeo bedejudo de 
flandes Colorado, que se vsavan Enton§es, y puesto que la 
carta bien Entendimos q no la sabrian ler, sino q como vie- 
sen El papel diferen§iado de lo suyo conosgerian, q Era de 
mensageria, y lo que les Enbiamos a dezir era q ybamos A 
su pueblo, que lo tuviesen por bien, que no les ybamos a ha- 
zer Enojo sino tenelles por Amigos, y esto fue, porq En 
aquel poblezuelo, nos §ertificaron que toda tascala, estava 
puesta En armas contra nosotros, porque segun pares§io ya 
tenian notigia, como yvamos, y llebavamos En nra conpa- 
fiia muchos Amigos, Ansi de §enpoal, como los de §ocotlan 
y de otros pueblos por donde aviamos pasado y todos solian 

Bemal Diai del CastiUo.— 24. 



178 

dar tribute a montezuma, tuvieron por gierto que yvamos 
contra ellos y como otras vezes con mafias y cavtelas, les 
Entravan En la trra y se la saqueavan pensaron querian ha- 
zer lo mysmo Agora por manera que luego que Uegaron los 
dos nros mensageros, con la carta y el chapeo, y comengaron 
a dezir su Enbaxada, los mandaron prender sin ser mas oydos 
y Estuvimos aguardando rrespuesta aquel dia y otro, y desq 
no venian despues de aber hablado cortes a los prin§ipales 
de aquel pueblo y dho las cosas que convenian dezir a§er- 
ca de nra santa fee y como Eramos vasallos de nro rrey y 
sefior, q nos Enbio a estas partes para quitar que no sacrifi- 
quen, ni maten honbres, ni coman carne vmana, ni hagan las 
torpedades q zuelen hazer, y se les dixo otras muchas cosas 
q En los mas pueblos por donde pasabamos, les soliamos de- 
zir, y despues de muchos ofresgim^s que les hizo, que les 
ayudaria, y les demando veynte yndios prin5ipales de gue- 
rra que fuesen con nosotros y Ellos nos los dieron de buena 
voluntad y con la buena ventura, Encomendandonos A dios 
partimos otro dia para tascala y yendo por nro camino, vie- 
nen nros dos mensageros q tenian presos, que pares§e ser 
que como andavan rrebuEltos En la guerra los yndios q los 
tenian A cargo y guarda, se descuydaron y soltaron de 
las prisiones y vinieron tan medrosos de lo q abian visto E 
oydo, q no lo agertavan a dezir porq segund dixeron, quan- 
do estavan presos q les amenazavan y les dezian, agora Emos 
de matar A esos q llamays tevles, y comer sus carnes, y ve- 
remos si son tan esforgados como publicays, y tanbien co- 
meremos vras carnes pues venis con tray§iones y con Enbus- 
tes de aquel traydor de montezuma, y por mas que les dezian 
los mensageros q Eramos contra los mexicanos, y q a to- 
dos los tascaltecas los queremos tener por her°^ no aprove- 
chava nada sus rrazones, y desq cortes y todos nosotros En- 
tendimos Aqllas soverbias palabras y como estavan de guerra 
puesto que nos dio bien q pensar En ello, diximos todos 
pues q Ansi es adelante En buen ora, y [nos] Encomendamosa 
dios, y nra vandera tendida q llebava El alferez corral porq 
ciertam!f nos gertificaron los yndios del poblezuelo donde 



179 

dormimos, q avian de salir al camino, A nos defender la En- 
trada, y ansi mismo nos lo dixeron los de genpoal como dho 
tengo, pues yendo desta manera sienpre yvamos hablando, 
cbmo avian de Entrar y salir los de cavallo a media rrienda 
y las lanyas Algo ter9iadas y de tres En tres, porq se ayuda- 
sen E que quando rronpiesemos por los escuadrones q Ue- 
vasen las langas por las caras y no parasen A dar lan§adas 
porque no les hechasen manos dellas, y q si acaesQiese q les 
Echasen mano, q con toda fuerga la tuviesen y debaxo del 
bra§o se ayudasen y poniendo Espuelas, con la furia del ca- 
vallo se la tomaria A sacar o llebaria Al yndio arrastrando. 
diran Agora q para q tanta diligengia, sin ver contrarios 
guerreros, q nos acometiesen A esto rrespondo y digo que 
dezia cortes, mira sefiores conpaiieros, ya veys q somos po- 
cos, Emos de Estar sienpre tan Aper§ebidos y avisados, co- 
mo si agora viesemos venir los contrarios a pelear, y no 
solamente vellos venir sino hazer quenta q ya estamos En 
la batalla con ellos, y q como Acaesge muchas vezes que 
Echan mano de la langa, por esto avemos destar avisados 
para El tal menester, ansi dello como de otras cosas que con- 
vienen En lo militar q ya bien E entendido que En el pelear 
no tenemos nes§esidad de abisos porq E conosyido, q por bien 
q yo lo quiera dezir, lo hazeys muy mas animosamente. y 
desta manera caminamos obra de dos leguas y hallamos vna 
fuer§a, bien fuerte, hecha de calicanto, y de otro betun tan 
rrezio que con picos de hierro Era mala de deshazer y hecha 
de tal manera, q para defensa y ofensa. Era harto rrezia de 
tomar y paramonos a mirar En ella, y pregunto cortes a los 
yndios de 90cotlan q a q fin tenian aqlla fuer§a hecha de 
aqlla manera, y dixeron q como Entre su senor montezuma 
y los de taxcala tenian guerras a la contina q los taxcalte- 
cas para defender sus pueblos, la avian hecho tan fuerte, 
porq ya aquella Es su tierra, y rreparamos vn rrato, y nos 
dio bien q pensar En ello y en la fortaleza, y cortes dixo, 
sefiores sigamos nra vandera qs la sefial de la santa cruz, q 
con ella vengeremos, y todos a vna le rrespondimos q bamos 
mucho en buena ora que dios es la fuer§a verdadera, y ansi 



180 

comengamos A caminar con el con5ierto q E dho, y no muy 
lexos vieron nros corredores del canpo hasta treynta yndios, 
questavan por espias, y tenian espadas de dos manos, y rro- 
delas, y lan§a8, y penachos, y las espadas son de pedernales, 
q cortan mas q navajas, puestas de arte, q no se pueden qbrar 
ni quitar las nabajas y son largas como montantes y tenian 
sus divisas, y penachos como E dho, y vistos por nros corre- 
dores del canpo, bolvieron a dar mandado, y cortes mando 
a los mismos q corriesen tras Ellos, y que procurasen de to- 
mar alguno, sin heridas, y luego Enbio otros §inco de cava- 
llo, porq si oviese alguna ^elada para q se ayudasen, y con 
todo nro Exerjito dimos priesa y el paso largo, y con gran 
congierto, porq los amigos q trayamos, nos dixeron q gierta- 
mente tenian gran copia de guerreros. En geladas, y desq los 
treynta yndios, questavan por espias, vieron que los de a ca- 
vallo yvan hazia ellos, y los llamavan con la mano, no qui- 
sieron aguardar hasta que los alcan§aron, y quisieran tomar 
alguno dellos, mas defendieronse muy bien q con los mon- 
tantes, y sus lan§as, hirieron los cavallos, y desq los nros los 
vieron tan bravosam^ pelear y sus cavallos heridos procura- 
ron DE hazer lo q Eran obligados y mataron §inco dellos, y 
estando En esto vienen muy de presto, y con gran furia vn 
esquadron de tascaltecas, questavan En §elada, de mas de 
tres mill dellos, y comengaron a flechar En todos los nros 
de cavallo, que ya estavamos juntos todos y dan vna buena 
rrefriega de flecha y varas tostadas y con sus montantes ha- 
zian maravillas, y En este ynstante llegamos con nra arti- 
lleria y escopetas y vallestas y poco a poco comengaron a 
bolver las espaldas, puesto que se detuvieron buen rrato pe- 
leando, con buen con§ierto, y En aquel rreEncuentro hirie- 
ron a quatro de los nros, y pares§eme q desde ay a pocos 
dias murio El vno de las heridas y como Era tarde se fueron 
rrecogiendo, y no los seguimos y quedaron muertos, hasta 
diez y siete dellos sin muchos Eridos y donde aquellas rren- 
gillas pasamos Era llano, y avia muchas casaa y labrangas de 
mayz E magueyales ques donde hazen el vino, y dormimos 
cabe vn arroyo, y con El vnto de vn yndio gordo, de los que 



ISl 

alii matamos, que se abrio, se curaron los heridos, que azey- 
te no lo avia, y tuvimos muy bien de §enar de vnos perrillos 
q EUos crian puesto questavan todas las casas despobladas y 
al9ado el hato, y avnque a los perrillos llebavan consigo de 
noche se bolvian a sus casas, y alii los apafiabamos q Era 
harto buen mantenim^ y estuvimos toda la noche muy a 
punto con escuchas y buenas rrondas y corredores del can- 
po, y los cavallos Erisillados y Enfrenados, por temor no 
diesen sobre nosotros, y quedarse aqui, y dire de las guerras 
que nos dieron. 



CAPITULO LXIII. de las guerras y bata- 
lias muy peligrosas, que tuvimos con los 
tascaltecas, y de lo que mas paso. — 

otro dia despues de nos Encomendar a dios, partimos de alii 
muy con§ertados nros Esquadrones, y los de cavallo muy 
avisados Como avian de Entrar rronpiendo y salir y En to- 
do caso procurar q no nos rronpiesen ni nos apartasemos 
vnos de otros E yendo ansi vienense a Encontrar con noso- 
tros, dos Esquadrones de guerreros, que abria seys mill, con 
grandes gritas, y atanbores y tronpetillas, y flechando, y ti- 
rando varas, y haziendo como fuertes guerreros, cortes man- 
do questuviesemos quedos y con tres prisioneros que les avia- 
mos tomado El dia antes, les Enbiamos a dezir y a rreqrir 
no diesen guerra, que les queremos tener por hermanos, y 
dixo a vno de nros soldados, q se dezia diego de godoy, que 
Era Escrivano de su magestad, q mirase lo que pasava y die- 
se testimonio dello, si se oviese menester, porq En algun 
tienpo no nos demandasen las muertes y danos q se rrecres- 
(iesen pues les rreqriamos con la paz, y como les hablaron 
los tres prisioneros, que les Enbiamos, mostraronse muy mas 
rrezios, y nos davan tanta guerra, que no les podiamos su- 
frir. Enton^es dixo cortes, Santiago, y a ellos, y de hecho arre- 



182 

metimos, de manera, que les matamos y herimos muchas de 
sua gentes con los tiros, y entrellos, tres capitanes, y vanse 
rretrayendo hazia vnos arcabuezos, donde Estavan En yela- 
da sobre mas de quarenta mill guerreros, Con su capitan ge- 
neral que se dezia xicotenga, y con sus devisas de bianco y 
Colorado porque aquella devisa, y librea, Era la de aquel xi- 
cotenga, y como avia alii vnas quebradas, no nos podiamos 
aprovechar de los cavallos, y con mucho con§ierto las pasa- 
mos, y al pasar, tuvimos muy gran peligro, porq se aprove- 
chavan de su buen flechar, y con sus langas y montantes, nos 
hazian mala obra, y avn las ondas y piedras como granizos 
Eran arto malas, y desq nos vimos En lo llano, con los ca- 
vallos y artilleria, nos lo pagavan, mas no osamos deshazer 
nro esquadron, porquel soldado que En algo se demandava, 
para seguir algunos de los montantes o capitanes, luego Era 
herido y corria gran peligro y andando En estas batallas, nos 
gercan por todas partes, que no nos podiamos valer poco ni 
mucho, q no osavamos arremeter A ellos, si no Era todos 
juntos porq no nos desGon9ertasen y rronpiesen, y si arre- 
metiamos, hayavamos sobre veynte Esquadrones sobre nos- 
otros, que nos rresistian y estavan nras vidas En mucho pe- 
ligro, porq Eran tantos guerreros que a punadas de tierra, 
nos §egaran, sino que la gran misericordia de dios, socorria 
y nos guardava, y andando En estas priesas, Entre aquellos 
grandes guerreros, y sus temerosos montantes, pares9e ser 
Acordaron de se juntar muchos dellos, de may ores fuergas, 
para tomar a manos algund cavallo, y lo pusieron por obra, 
arremetiendo E echan mano a vna muy buena yegua, y bien 
rrebuelta de juego y de carrera y el cavallero q En ellayva, 
buen ginete q se dezia pedro de moron, y como Entro rron- 
piendo, con otros tres de a cavallo, Entre los Esquadrones de 
los contrarios, porq ansi les Era mandado, porque se ayuda- 
sen vnos a otros, Echanle mano de la langa, q no la pudo sa- 
car y otros le dan de cuchilladas Con los montantes y le hi- 
rieron malamente y Entonges dieron vna cuchillada a la 
yegua q le cortaron el pescue^o rredondo y colgado del pe- 
llejo alii quedo muerta y si de presto no socorrieran sus con- 



183 

paneros de a cavallo, al pedro moron tanbien le acabaran de 
matar pues qi^^a podiamos con todo nro esquadron ayu- 
dalle, digo otra vez q por temor que no nos Acabasen de des- 
baratar no podiamos yr a vna parte ni a otra, q harto tenia- 
mos que sustentar no nos llevasen de veuQida, questavamos 
muy En peligro y todavia acudimos a la priesa de la yegua 
y tuvimos lugar de salvar al moron, y quitarseles de poder 
que ya le Uevaban medio muerto, y cortamos la §incha de la 
yegua porq no se quedase alii la silla, y alii En aquel soco- 
rro hirieron diez de los nros y tengo para mi que matamos 
Enton9es, quatro capitanes, porque andavamos juntos pie 
con pie y con las espadas les haziamos mucho dano, porq co- 
mo aquello paso, se comengaron a rretirar y llebaron la ye- 
gua, la cual hizieron pedagos, para mostrar En todos los pue- 
blos de tascala, y despues supimos que avian ofresgido a sus 
ydolos las herraduras, y el chapeo de flandes y las dos cartas 
q lea enbiamos para q viniesen de paz, la yegua que mataron 
Era de vn joan sedefio. y porq En aquella sazon estava he- 
rido el sedefio de tres heridas del dia antes, por Esta cavsa 
se la dio al moron que Era muy buen ginete y murio el mo- 
ron entonges, o de ay a dos dias, de las heridas porq no me 
acuerdo verle mas. y bolvamos a nra batalla, q como abia 
vna ora questavamos En las rrenzillas, peleando, y los tiros 
les debieron hazer mucho mal, porq como Eran muchos an- 
davan tan juntos, y por fuerga les avian de Uevar copia de- 
llos, pues los de cavallo, y escopetas, y vallestas, y espadas, 
y rrodelas y langas todos a vna peleavamos como barones, 
por salvar nras vidas, y hazer lo q Eramos obligados, porq 
ciertam*® las teniamos En gran peligro, qual nunca estuvie- 
ron, y a lo q despues nos dixeron. En aquella batalla, les ma- 
tamos muchos yndios, y Entrellos ocho capitanes muy prin- 
§ipales, E hijos de los viejos cagiques qstaban En el pueblo, 
cabecera mayor, y a Esta cavsa se rretruxeron con muy buen 
con§ierto, y a nosotros q no nos peso dello, y no los seguimos 
porq no nos podiamos tener En los pies de cansados, alii nos 
qdamos En aquel poblezuelo, que todos aquellos canpos es- 
ta van muy poblados y avn tenian hechas otras casas debaxo 



184 

de tierra, como cuevas En que bivian muchos yndios, y Ua- 
mavase donde paso Esta batalla tehua9ingo, o tehuaca§ingo, 
y fue dada En dos dias de setienbre de mill E quinientos y 
diez y nuebe anos, y desque nos vimos eon vitoria dimos mu- 
chas gra§ias a dios que nos libro de tan grandes peligros y 
desde alii nos rretruximos luego con todo nro rreal a vnos 
cues, questavan buenos y altos, como En fortaleza, y con el 
vnto del yndio q ya E dho otras vezes, se curaron nros sol- 
dados, que fueron quinze, y murio vno dellos de las heridas, 
y tanbien se curaron quatro cavallos questavan heridos, y 
rreposamos y 5enamos muy bien aquella noche porque tenia- 
mos muchas gallinas, y perrillos q ovimos En aquellas casas, 
y con muy buen rrecavdo descuchas y rrondas, y los corredo- 
res del canpo, descansamos hasta otro dia por la mafiana. 
En aquesta batalla prendimos quinze yndios y los dos dellos 
prin§ipales. vna cosa tenian los tascaltecas En esta batalla y 
En todas las demas, que En yriendoles qualquiera yndio, 
luego los llevavan y no podiamos ver los muertos. 



CAPITULO LXIIII— Como tuvimos nro 
rreal asentado En vnos pueblos j caserias 
q se dize teoacjingo o tevagingo y lo que 
alii hezimos. 

como nos sentimos muy trabajados de las batallas pasadas y 
estavan muchos soldados y cavallos heridos, sin los q alii 
murieron, y teniamos nesQesidad de adovar las vallestas y 
alistar de saetas, estuvimos vn dia sin hazer Cosa q de con- 
tar sea, y otro dia por la mafiana, dixo cortes q seria bueno 
yr a correr El canpo, con los de cavallo questavan buenos 
para ello, porq no pensasen los tascaltecas, que dexavamos 
de gerrear, por la batalla pasada, y porq viesen q sienpre 
los aviamos de seguir, y el dia pasado aviamos Estado sin 
salir A los buscar, E q Era mejor ylles nosotros Acometer 



185 

que Ellos a nosotros, porque no sintiesen nra flaqueza, y 
porq Aquel canpo Es muy llano y muy poblado, por mane- 
ra q con siete de a cavallo, y pocos vallesteros y escopeteros 
y obra de dozientos soldados, y con nros Amigos, salimos y 
dexamos En el rreal buen rrecavdo, segund nra posibilidad, 
y por las Casas y pueblos por donde y vamos, prendimos has- 
ta veynte yndios E yndias sin hazelles ningun mal y los 
amigos como son crueles, qmaron muchas Casas, y truxeron 
bien de Comer y gallinas y perrillos, E luego nos bolvimos 
Al rreal, q Era jerca y acordo cortes, se soltasen los prisio- 
neros, y se les dio primero de comer y dona marina y agui- 
lar les alagaron y dieron Cuentas y les dixeron q no fuesen 
mas locos, E q viniesen de paz, q nosotros les qremos Ayu- 
dar y tener por hermanos, y Entonges tanbien soltamos los 
dos prisioneros q Eran prin§ipales y se les dio otra Carta, 
para q fuesen a dezir a los ca§iqs mayores, questavan En el 
pueblo Cabegera de todos los de aqlla provin§ia q no les veni- 
mos A hazer mal ni Enojo, sino paA pasar por su tierra E 
yr A mexico A hablar A montezuma, y los dos mensageros 
fueron al rreal de xicotenga, questava de alii obra de dos le- 
guas En vnos pueblos y casas, q me paresge q se Uamavan 
teCuadginpa^ingo y como les dieron la carta y dixeron nra 
Enbaxada, la rrespuesta que les dio xicotenga q fuesemos A 
su pueblo, a donde Esta su padre, y q alia haran las pazes 
con hartarse de nras Carnes y honrrar sus dioses con nros 
cora§one8 y sangre, E q pa otro dia de majuana veriamos su 
rrespuesta, y desq cortes y todos nosotros, oymos Aquellas 
tan sobervias palabras, como estavamos ostigados de las pa- 
sadas batallas, E rreEncuentros, verdaderamente no lo tuvi- 
mos por bueno, y aquellos mensageros los Alago cortes con 
blandas palabras porq les paresjio, q avian perdido el mie- 
do, y les mando dar vnos sartalejos de quentas, y Esto para 
tornalles A Enbiar por mensageros sobre la paz. Entonges 
se ynformo muy por estenso, como y de q manera estava El 
capitan xicotenga, y q poderes tenia Consigo, y le dixeron 
q tenia mucha mas gente, que la otra vez, quando nos dio 
guerra porq traya §inco capitanes consigo, y q cada capita- 

Bernal Dlai del CaatiUo.— 25. 



186 

nia tray a diez mill guerreros, y fue destamanera q lo Conta- 
va, q de la par^ialidad de xicotenga, que ya no via de viejo, 
padre del mismo Capitan, venian diez mill, y de la parte de 
otro gran cagique, q se dezia maseEscasi, otros diez mill, y 
de otro gran principal, q se dezia chichimecatecle otros tan- 
tos, y de la parte de otro Cacique sefior de topeyanco, que se 
dezia tecapacaneca, otros diez mill, e de otro Ca^iq q se de- 
zia guaxoban, otros diez mill, por manera que Eran A la 
quenta ^inquenta mill y que avian de sacar su vandera y 
sefia, q Era vna ave blanca, tendidas las Alas como q queria 
bolar, que pares^e como abestruz, y cada capitania con su 
divisa y librea, porque cada Cacique ansi las tenian diferen- 
giadas como En nra castilla tienen los duques e condes, y to- 
do esto q Aqui E dho, tuvimoslo por muy gierto, porq gier- 
tos yndios de los q tuvimos presos, q soltamos Aquel dia, lo 
dezian muy claramente, y avnq no Eran creydos por enton- 
§es, y desq Aqllo vimos, Como somos honbres, y temiamos 
la muerte, muchos de nosotros, y avn todos los demas nos 
confesamos con el padre de la md y con el clerigo joan diaz, 
que toda la noche Estuvieron En oyr de penitenjia, y en- 
comendamonos A dios q nos librase, no fuesemos venyidos, 
y destamanera pasamos, hasta otro dia. y la batalla q nos 
dieron Aqui lo dire— 



CAPITULO LXIIIII. de la gran batalla q 
ovimos Con el poder de taxcalteca, y qui- 
so dios nro senor darnos vitoria, y lo que 
mas paso Es lo sigui® 

otro dia de mafiana q fueron ^inco de setienbre, de mill E 
quinientos y diez y nueve afios, pusimos los cavallos En con- 
9ierto, q no quedo ninguno de los heridos que alii no salie- 
sen, para hazer Cuerpo, y ayudasen los q pudiesen, y Aper- 
Qebidos los vallesteros, q con gran con9ierto gastasen El 



187 

almazen vnoe Armando, otros soltando y los escopeteros per 
el consiguiente, y los de Espada y rrodela, que la estocada 
o euchillada q diesemos, que pasasen las Entrafias, porq no 
se osasen juntar tanto como la otra vez, El artilleria bien 
Aper^ebida yva, y como ya tenian aviso los de cavallo, q se 
ayudasen vnos A otros, y las langas tergiadas sin pararse a 
langear sino por las caras y ojos, Entrando y saliendo a me- 
dia rrienda, y q ningund soldado saliese del Esquadron y 
con nra vandera tendida y quatro Conpafieros Aguardando 
Al Alferez Corral, ansi salimos de nro rreal y no aviamos an- 
dado medio quarto de legua quando vimos asomar los can- 
pos llenos de guerreros, con grandes penachos y sus devisas 
y mucho rruydo de tronpetillas y bozinas aqui abia bien 
quescrevir y ponello En rrelagion lo que En esta peligrosa 
e dudosa batalla pasamos, porq nos $ercaron por todas par- 
tes tantos guerreros, que se podria conparar, como si oviese 
vnos grandes prados de dos leguas de ancho E otras tantas 
de largo. En medio dellos quatro^ientos honbres. Ansi Era 
todos los canpos llenos dellos, y nosotros obra de quatro5ien- 
tos, muchos heridos y dolientes y supimos Qierto questa vez, 
que venian con pensamiento, que no avian de dexar ningu- 
no de nosotros a vida, que no avia de ser sacrificado a sus 
ydolos. bolvamos a nra batalla, pues como comen^aron a 
rronper con nosotros, q granigo de piedra de los onderos, 
pues flecheros, todo El suelo hecho parva de varas tostadas 
de a dos gajos, q pasan qualquiera arma y las Entrafias a 
donde no hay defensa y los despada y rrodela, y de otras ma- 
yores quespadas, Como montantes y lan^as que priesa nos da- 
van y con q braveza se juntavan con nosotros, y con que 
grandisimas gritas y alaridos, puesto q nos ayudavamos con 
tan gran congierto, con nra Artilleria, y escopetas, y valles- 
tas, que les haziamos harto dafio, a los q se nos Uegaban con 
sus espadas, y montantes les davamos buenas Estocadas, q les 
haziamos Apartar y no se juntavan tanto como la otra vez 
pasada, los de a cavallo Estavan tan diestros, y hazianlo tan 
varonilmente que despues de dios, ques El q nos guardaba, 
Ellos fueron fortaleza. yo vi enton^es medio desbaratado nro 



18S 

Esquadron que no Aprovechavan bozes de cortes ni de otros 
Capitanes, para q tornasemos A §errar, tanto numero de yn- 
dios cargo Entonjes sobre nosotros q milagrosamente A pu- 
ras estocadas les hizimos q nos diesen lugar con que bolvi-* 
mos A ponernos En conyierto. vna cosa nos dava la vida, y 
Era q como Eran muchos, y estavan amontonados, los tiros 
les hazian mucho mal y demas desto, no se sabian capitanear, 
porq no podian Uegar todos los capitanes Con sus gentes, y 
a lo q supimos, desde la otra batalla pasada abian tenido pen- 
dengias y renzillas Entre El capitan xicotenga, con otro ca- 
pitan hijo de chichimecatecle sobre que dezia El vn Capitan 
al otro que no lo avia hecho bien en la batalla pasada, y El 
hijo de chichimecatecle, rrespondio, q muy mejor quel, y se 
lo haria conos5er de su persona A la de xicotenga, por ma- 
nera q En esta batalla no quiso ayudar con. su gente El 
chichimecatecle al xicotengo, antes supimos muy ^ierta- 
mente q convoco a la capitania de guaxol^ingo, que no pe- 
lease y demas desto, desde la batalla pasada temian los ca- 
vallos E tiros y espadas y ballestas, y nro buen pelear, y sobre 
todo, la gran misericordia de dios que nos dava esfuer§o pa- 
ra nos sustentar y como El xicotenga no Era obedes§ido de 
dos capitanes, y nosotros les haziamos gran dano, q les ma- 
tavamos muchas de sus gentes, las quales Encubrian, porq 
Como Eran muchos. En hiriendolos A qualquiera de los su- 
yos, luego lo apafiavan, y lo llebavan A cuestas, ansi En es- 
ta batalla como En la pasada, no podiamos ver ningun muer- 
to, y como ya peleavan de mala gana, y sintieron que las 
capitanias, de los dos capitanes por mi memorados, no les 
Acudian, Comenzaron Afloxar y porq segun paresgio, En Aq- 
Ua batalla matamos vn capitan muy prin9ipal, q de los otros 
no los cuento, y comen§aron A rretraerse con buen con9ierto, 
y los de cavallo A media rrienda. siguiendolos, poco trecho, 
porq no se podian ya tener de cansados, y desq nos vimos 
libres de aquella multitud de guerreros dimos muchas gra- 
$ias A dios. AUi nos mataron vn soldado y hirieron mas de 
sesenta, y tanbien hirieron A todos los cavallos. A mi me 
dieron dos heridas, la vna En la cabeza de pedrada, y otra 



189 

en el muslo de vn flechazo, mas no Eran para dexar de pe- 

lear y belar, y ayudar A nros soldados, y ansi mismo lo hazian 

todoa los soldados, questavan heridos, q si no Eran muy pe- 

ligrosas las heridas, Aviamos de pelear y velar con ellas porq 

de otra manera, pocos quedaran questuviesen sin heridas, y 

luego nos fuymos A nro rreal, muy contentos y dando mu* 

. chas gragias A dios, y enterramos El muerto En vna de aque* 

' Has Casas q tenian hechas En los soterraneos porq no lo vie- 

. sen los yndios que Eramos mortales, sino que creyesen q 

Eramos tevles, Como EUos dezian, y derrocamos mucha tie- 

. rra engima de la casa porq no oliesen los cuerpos, y se cura- 

• ron todos los heridos, con el vnto del yndio, q otras vezes e 

dhQ. o que mal rrefrigerio teniamos, que avn azeyte pa cu- 

rar ni sal avia. otra falta teniamos y grande q Era rropa, pa^ 

ra nos abrigar q venia vn biento tan frio de la sierra nebada, 

que nos hazia Ateritar, porq las lan^as y escopetas, y valleg- 

tas, mal nos cobijaban. Aquella noche dormimos con mas 

sosiego, que la pasada, puesto q teniamos mucho rrecavdo de 

corredores y espias, y velas y rrondas. y dexallo E Aqui, E 

dire lo q otro dia hezimos. En esta batalla prendimos tres 

yndios prin§ipales. 



CAPITULO LXVI Como otro dia Enbiamos 
mensageros A los Cagiques de tascala rro- 
gandoles con la paz y lo q sobrello hi- 
zieron — 

despues de pasada la batalla por mi memorada, y prendidos 
En ella los tres yndios prin9ipales, Enbiolos luego nro capi- 
tan Cortes juntam^f con los dos qstavan En nro rreal, q avian, 
ydo otras vezes por mensageros, y les mando q dixesen A los 
Caciques de tascala, q les rrogavamos q luego vengan de paz 
y q nos den pasada por su trra para yr a mexico, como otras 
vezes les Emos Enbiado a dezir E q si agora no vienen^ q 



190 

lee mataremos todas sus gentes, y porq les qremos mucho, 
y tener por hermanos, no les quisieramos Enqjar, si EUoe 
no oviesen dado cabsa a EUo, y se les dixo muchos Alagos, 
para traellos a nra amistad y aquellos mensageros fiieron 
luego, de buena gana A la Cabegera de tascala y dixeron su 
Enbajada, A todos los Caciques, por mi ya nonbrados, los 
quales hayaron juntos, con otros muchos viejos y papas, y 
Estavan muy tristes ansi del mal 8ub5e8o de la guerra, Co- 
mo de la muerte de los capitanes parientes hijos suyos, q En 
las batallas murieron, y dizque no los quisieron escuchar de 
buena gana, y lo q sobrello acordaron fue q luego mandaron 
llamar todos los Adivinos, y papas, y otros q Echavan suer- 
tes q llaman tacal naguas, q son como hechizeros, y dixe- 
ron q mirasen por sus adevinangas, y hechizos, y suertes q 
gente Eramos, y si podriamos ser ven§idos, dandonos guerra 
de dia y de noche, A la contina y tanbien pa saber si Era- 
mos tevles, ansi como les dezian los de ^enpoal, q ya E dho 
otras vezes, q son Cosas malas, como demonios, E q cosas 
Comiamos, E que mirasen todo Esto Con mucha diligengia. 
y despues q se juntaron los adevinos y hechizeros, y muchos 
papas, y hechas sus adevinan^as y hechadas sus suertes y 
todo lo q solian hazer, pares9e ser dixeron q En las suertes 
hallaron q Eramos honbres de hueso y carne y q Comiamos 
gallinas, y perros, y pan y fruta, quando lo teniamos, y q no 
comiamos cames de yndios ni coragones de los q matavamos 
porq segun pares^io los yndios Amigos q trayamos de jen- 
poal, les hizieron En creyente, q Eramos tevles, E q comia- 
mos cora^ones de los yndios y q las lonbardas hechavan rra- 
yos, como caen del gielo, y quel lebrel, que Era tigre o leon, 
y que los cavallos Eran para alcangar A los yndios, quando 
los qriamos matar y les dixeron otras muchas nifierias y lo 
peor de todo q les dixeron sus papas y adivinos fue q de 
dia, no podiamos ser venyidos, sino de noche porq como ano- 
che^ia, se nos quitaban las fuer^as, y mas les dixeron los he- 
chizeros, q Eramos Esfor^ados, y q todas Estas virtudes te- 
niamos de dia hasta q se ponia El sol, y desq Anoche^ia, no 
teniamos fuer^a ninguna y desq Aquello Entendieron los 



191 

Caciques, y lo tuvieron por muy gierto, se lo Enbiaron a de- 
zir A su Capitan general xicotenga, para q luego con breve- 
dad, venga vna noche Con grandes poderes, A nos dar gue- 
rra, El qual desque lo supo, junto obra de diez mill yndios, 
lo8 mas Esfor^ados q tenian y vino a nro rreal, y por tree 
partes Encomengo A dar vna mano de flecha, y tirar varas, 
Con sus tiraderas, de vn gajo y los despadias y macanas y 
montantes, por otra parte, por manera q de rrepente, tuvie- 
ron por gierto, q llebarian Algunos de nosotros para sdcrifi- 
car y mejor lo hizo nro seilor dios, q por muy secretam^ q 
Ellos venian, nos hallaron muy aperjebidos, porq como sin- 
tieron su gran rruydo q traya, A mata cavallo vinieron nros 
Corredores del canpo, y las Espias, A dar Alarma, y como 
Estavamos tan Acostunbrados A dormir calgados, y las ar- 
mas vestidas y los cavallos Ensillados y Enfrenados, y todo 
genero de armas muy A punto, les rresistimos con las Esco- 
petas, y vallestas, y A Estocadas. de presto buelven las Es- 
paldas, como Era El canpo llano y hazia luna, los de a ca- 
vallo los siguieron vn poco, donde por la maflana, hallamos 
tendidos, muertos, y heridos, hasta veynte dellos, por ma- 
nera, q se buelven con gran perdida, y muy Arrepentidos, 
de la venida de noche, y avn oy dezir, q Como no les subye- 
dio bien lo q los papas y las suertes, y hechizeros les dixe- 
ron, q sacrificaron A dos dellos. Aqlla noche mataron A vn yn- 
dio De nros Amigos de Qenpoal, E hirieron dos soldados y vn 
cavallo, y alii prendimos quatro dellos, y desq nos vimos li- 
bres de aqlla Arrebatada rrefriega, dimos gra^ias A dios y 
Enterramos El amigo de ^enpoal y curamos los heridos y al 
cavallo, y dormimos lo q quedo de la noche con grande rre- 
cavdo En El rreal, ansi Como lo teniamos de costunbre, y 
desq Amanes^io, y nos vimos todos heridos, A dos y A tres 
heridas, y muy cansados y otros dolientes y Entrapajados, 
y xicotenga q sienpre nos seguia y faltavan ya sobre qua- 
renta y jinco soldados q se avian muerto. En las batallas, y 
dolen^ias y frios, y Estavan dolientes otros doze y ansi mis- 
mo nro Capitan Cortes tanbien tenya calenturas, y avn El 
padre de la md, q Con los trabajos y peso de las armas, q 



192 

sienpre trayamos A Cuestas, y otras malas venturas de frios 
y falta de sal, q no la comiamos, ni la hallavamos, y demas 
desto, davamos q pensar q fin abriamos En aquestas guerras, 
E ya q alii se acabasen, q seria de nosotros A donde aviamos 
de yr, porq Entrar en mexico, teniamoslo por cosa rrezia, A 
cabsa de sus grandes fuergas, E deziamos q quando Aqllos 
de tascala nos An puesto En aquel punto y nos hizieron En 
creyente nros Amigos los de §enpoal, questavan de paz, q 
quando nos viesemos En la guerra Con los grandes poderfes 
de monte§uma, q que podriamos hazer, y demas desto no 
jBabiamos de los q quedaron poblados En la villa rrica, ni 
EUos de nosotros, y Como Entre todos nosotros abia Caba- 
lleros y soldados tan Engelentes, varones y tan Esforgados y 
de buen Consejo, q Cortes ninguna Cosa dezia, ni hazia sin 
primero tomar sobrello muy maduro Consejo, y acuerdo Con 
nosotros, puesto ql coronista gomara, diga, hizo Cortes Esto, 
fue alia, vino de Aculla, y dize otras tantas cosAs, q no lie- 
ban camino, y avnque Cortes fuera de hierro, segund lo 
quenta El gomara En su historia, no podia Acudir A todas 
partes, bastava q dixera q lo hazia Como buen capitan, y 
Esto digo, porq despues de las grandes mds q nro sefior nos 
hazia En todos nros hechos y En las vitorias pasadas y En 
todo lo demas paresge ser q A los soldados nos dava dios 
grayias y buen Consejo, para aconsejar q Cortes hiziese to- 
d^a las Cosas muy bien hechas dexemos de loar y hablar En 
loas pasadas, pues no hazen mucho a nra ystoria y digamos, 
como todos A vna Esforgavamos A cortes, y le diximos q 
Curase de Su persona q ya alii Estavamos, y Con El Ayuda 
de dios, q pues aviamos Escapado de tan peligrosas batalla^ 
q para Algun buen fin Era nro sefior jesuxpo servido guar- 
darnos y q luego soltase los prisioneros y q los Enbiase A 
los Ca§iqs mayores, otra vez por mi memorados, q vengan 
de paz, E q se les perdonara todo lo hecho, y la muerte de 
la yegua. dexemos Esto y digamos Como dofia marina con 
ser muger de la trra q Esfuergo tan varonil tenia q con oyr 
cada dia q nos avian de matar y comer nras carnes con axi, 
• y avernos visto gercados En las batallas pasadas, y q agora 



I 198 

^todos Estavamos heridos y dolientes, xamas vimos flaqza 

. En Ella, sino muy mayor Esfuer§o q de muger, y A los 

* mensageros q agora Enbiavamos, les hablo la dona marina, 

I y gr"!? de aguilar q vengan luego de paz, q si no vienen 

dentro de dos dias les yremos a matar y destruyr sus trras, 

I E yremos a bnscarlos A su gibdad y con Estas bravosas pa- 

i labras fueron A la cabegera, donde Estava xicotenga El vie- 

; jo y mase Escasi. dexemos Esto y dire otra cosa q E visto, q 

. El coronista gomara no Escrive En su historia, ni haze min- 

. qion si nos matavan o Estavamos heridos, ni pasavamos tra- 

. bajo, ni Adoles§iamos, sino todo lo quescrive, Es como quien 

va a bodas, y lo hallavamos hecho. o quan mal le informa- 

ron los q tal le aconsexaron q lo pusiese asi En su ystoria y 

a todos los conquistadores nos A dado q pensar, En lo q A 

Escrito, no siendo asi, y debia considerar q desq viesemos su 

ystoria, abiamos de dezir la verdad. olvidemos A gomara, y 

digamos como nros mensageros fueron A la cabe§era de tas- 

cala con nro mensage y pares§eme q Uebaron vna carta q 

avnq sabiamos q no la avian de Entender, sino q se tenia 

por cosa de mandam^ y con Ella vna saeta, y hallaron a los 

dos Cagiqs mayores qstaban hablando Con otros pringipales, 

y lo q sobrello rrespondieron, adelante lo dire — 



CAPITULO LXVII. Como tornamos A En- 
biar mensageros A los Caciques de tasca- 
la para q vengan de paz, y lo que sobrello, 
hizieron y acordaron — 




OMO llegaron a tascala los mensageros q Enbiamos 
A tratar de las pazes, les hallaron questaban En 
consulta los dos mas prin§ipales Ca§iques q se de- 
zian mase Escasi y xicotenga, El viejo, padre del capitan ge- 

Bemal Diaz del Castillo.— 26. 



194 

ral, q tanbien se dezia xicotenga, otras muchas vezes por mi 
memorado, y desq les oyeron su Enbajada Estuvieron suspen- 
ses vn rrato q no hablaron y quiso dios, quespiro En los pen- 
samientos q hiziesen pazes con nosotros, y luego Enbiaron 
A llamar, A todos los mas caciques y capitanes q avia En 
sus poblazones y A los de vna provingia, questa Junto con 
Ellos q se dize huexogingo, q Eran sus Amigos y confede- 
rados, y todos juntos En aquel pueblo q Estavan, q Era ca- 
begera, les hizo mase Escasi y el viejo xicotenga, q Eran bien 
Entendidos, vn rrazonami^ Casi q fue desta manera, segund 
despues se Entendio, avnq no las palabras formales. herma- 
nos y amigos nros, ya abeys visto quantas vezes Esos tevles 
q Estan En El canpo, Esperando guerras, nos an Enbiado 
mensageros A demandar paz, y dizen q nos vienen A ayudar 
y tener En lugar de hermanos, y ansi mismo, abeys visto, 
quantas vezes an llebado presos muchos de nros vasallos, q 
no les hazen mal y luego los sueltan. bien veys como les 
Emos dado guerra tres vezes con todos nros poderes, ansi de 
dia Como de noche y no ban sido ven§idos, y Ellos nos An 
muerto, En los conbates q les Emos dado, muchas de nras 
gentes, E hijos y parientes y Capitanes. Agora de nuebo 
buelben a demandar paz, y los de genpoal q traen En su 
conpafiia dizen, q son contrarios de monteguma y sus mexi- 
canos, y q les An mandado q no le den tributo los pueblos 
de la sierra totonaques, ni los de §enpoal, pues bien se os 
Acordara, q los mexicanos, nos dan guerra cada Aiio, de mas 
de §ient anos A Esta parte y bien veys, qstamos En Estas 
nras tierras, como Acorralados q no osamos salir A buscar 
• sal ni avn la Comemos, ni avn Algodon, q pocas mantas de- 
-^ tto traemos pues si salen o an salido Algunos de los nros a 
*la buscar, pocos buelben Con las vidas, qstos traydores me- 
vxicanos, y sus confederados, nos los matan y hazen Esclavos. 
ya nro tacalnaguas y adivinos y papas, nos An dho lo q sien- 
ten de sus personas destos tevles y q son Esforgados, lo q me 
paresge Es, q procuremos de tener Amistad con Ellos, y si 
no fueren honbres, sino tevles de vna manera o de otra, les 
hagamos buena conpafiia, y luego vayan quatro nros pringi- 



195 

pales y les lleben muy bien de comer, y mostremosles amor 
y paz, porq nos Ayuden y defiendan de nros Enemigos, y 
traygamosles aqui luego con nosotros, y demosles mugeres 
para q de su generagion tengamos parientes, pues segun di- 
zen los Enbajadores q nos Enbian a tratar las pazes q traen 
mugeres Entrellos. y desq oyeron Este razonami^ todos los 
ca5iqs y pringipales, les pares^io bien y dixeron q Era cosa 
Ayertada, y q luego vayan a Entender En las pazes y q se le 
Enbie A hazer saber A su Capitan xicotenga, y a los demas 
capitanes q consigo tiene, para q luego se vengan sin dar mas 
guerras y les digan q ya tenemos hechas pazes, y Enbiaron 
luego mensageros sobrello, y El capitan xicotenga El mogo 
no lo quiso Escuchar a los quatro pringipales y mostro tener 
Enojo, y los trato mal de palabras y q no Estaba por las pa- 
5es, y dixo, q ya avia muerto muchos tevles, y la yegua, y q 
El queria dar otra noche sobre nosotros, y acabarnos de ven- 
der y matar, la qual rrespuesta desq la oyo su padre, xico- 
^Jienga El biejo, y mase Escasi y los demas Ca9iques, se Enoja- 
ron de manera q luego Enbiaron a mandar a los capitanes, 
y a todo su Exer§ito, q no fuesen Con El xicotenga, A nos dar 
guerra, ni En tal caso le obedeziesen en cosa que les manda- 
se, si no fuese para hazer pages y tanpoco lo quiso obedes§er 
y desq vieron la desobidien§ia de su capitan, luego Enbiaron 
los quatro prin^ipales q otra vez les Avian mandado q vi- 
niesen a nro rreal y truxesen bastimento, y para tratar las 
pases, En nonbre de toda tascala, y guaxogingo y los quatro 
biejos por temor de xicotenga El mogo no vinieron En aqlla 
sazo, y porq En vn Estante acaes§en dos y tres Cosas ansi 
En nro rreal como En Este tratar de pages y por fuer§a ten- 
go de tomar Entre manos lo que mas viene Al proposito, de- 
xare de hablar En los quatro yndios pringipales q Enbian A 
tratar las pages, q avn no han venido por temor de xicoten- 
ga, En este tiempo fuymos con cortes a vn pueblo junto a 
nro rreal y lo q paso dire adelante — 



196 



CAPITULO LXVIII. Como Acordamos de 
yr a vn pueblo questava ^erca de nro rreal, 
y lo q sobrello se hizo — / 

como avia dos dias questavamos sin hazer Cosas q de contar 
sea fue Acordado, y avn aconsejamos a cortes, q vn pueblo, 
questaba obra de vna legua de nro rreal q le aviamos Enbia- 
do a llamar de paz y no venia, q fuesemos vna noche y die- 
semos sobrel, no para hazelles mal, digo matalles, ni herilles, 
ni traellos presos, mas de traer Comida y atemorizalles, o ha- 
blalles de paz, segun viesemos lo q Ellos hazian y dizese Es- 
te pueblo gunpanzingo, y Era cabe§era de muchos pueblos 
chicos y Era sujeto El pu^ donde Estabamos, alii A donde 
teniamos nro rreal tecoad§unpan§ijQgo, q todo al rrededor Es- 
tava muy poblado por manera q vna noche al quarto de la 
modorra, madrugamos para yr Aquel pueblo Con seys de 
cavallo de los mejores y con los mas sanos soldados y con diez 
vallesteros y ocho Escopeteros, y cortes por nro Capitan, pues- 
to q tenia Calenturas o ter5ianas, y dexamos El mejor rrecav- 
do q podiamos En el rreal. Antes q amanesgiese, Con dos 
oras, Comensamos A caminar y hazia vn viento tan frio aq- 
11a manana, q venia de la sierra nevada, q nos hazia tenblar 
o tiritar y bien lo sintieron los cavallos q llebabamos porq 
dos dellos se atorgonaron E Estaban tenblando de lo qual nos 
peso creyendo no se muriesen y cortes los mando q se bol- 
viesen Al rreal los cavalleros duefios cuyos Eran, A curar 
dellos, y como Estaba gerca El pueblo, Uegamos Antes q fue- 
se de dia, y desq nos sintieron los naturales del, fueronse hu- 
yendo de sus Casas, dando bozes vnos a otros, q se guardasen 
de los tevles, q les ybamos A matar q no se aguardavan pa- 
dres a hijos y desq aqllo vimos, hizimos alto En vn patio 
hasta q fue de dia, q no se les hizo ningun dano, y desq vnos 
papas, qstavan En vnos cues, y otros viejos prin§ipales vie- 
ron qstavamos alii sin les hazer Enojo ninguno, vienen A 



197 

Cortes y le dizen q les perdone porq no an ydo a nro rreal, 
de paz, ni llevar de Comer, quando los Enbiamos a llamar 
y la cavsa A sido quel Capitan xicotenga, questa de alii muy 
yerca se lo a Enbiado a dezir q no lo den, y porq de aquel 
pueblo y otros muchos le baste5en su rreal, E que tiene Con- 
sigo los honbres de guerra yjos de aquel pueblo y de toda la 
tierra de tascala y cortes les dixo. Con nras lenguas dofia 
marina y aguilar q sienpre yvan con nosotros A qualquiera 
Entrada q ybamos y avnq fuese de noche, q no oviesen mie- 
do, y q luego fuesen A dezir A sus cagiqs a la cabegera q ven- 
gan de paz, porq la guerra Es mala para ellos y Enbio Aques- 
tos papas, porq de los otros mensageros q abiamos enbiado 
avn no teniamos rrespuesta ninguna de lo por mi memora- 
do, sobre q Enbiavan a tratar las pazes, a los ca§iques de tas- 
cala con los quatro prinyipales, q no avian venido En aque- 
11a sazon e aqllos papas de aql pueblo buscaron de presto 
sobre quarenta gallinas y gallos y dos yndias para moler tor- 
tillas y las truxeron y cortes se lo Agrades§io y mando q luego 
lo llevasen veynte yndios de aquel pueblo a nro rreal y sin 
temor ninguno fueron con el bastimento y se Estuvieron En 
el rreal, hasta la tarde y se les dio contezuelas, con que bol- 
vieron muy contentos A su casa, E a todas aqllas caserias nros 
vezinos, dezian q Eramos buenos, q no les enojavamos, y aq- 
llos papas y viejos se lo hizieron saber al Capitan xicotenga 
Como abian dado la comida y las yndias, y rrifio mucho con 
ellos y fueron luego a la cabegera A hazello saber A los ca- 
ciques viejos y desq lo supieron q no les haziamos mal nin- 
guno y aunq pudieramos matalles aqlla noche muchos de 
sus gentes y les Enbiamos a demandar pages, se holgaron y 
les mandaron q cada dia nos traxesen todo lo q oviesemos 
menester, y tornaron otra vez A mandar A los quatro prin- 
gipales, q otras vezes les Encargaron las pages, q luego, En 
aquel ynstante fuesen a nro rreal y llevasen toda la comida 
q les mandavan. y ansi nos bolvimos luego a nro rreal con 
el bastimento, E yndias y muy Contentos. E quedarse aqui 
y dire lo q paso en el rreal Entre tan to q aviamos ydo Aquel 
pueblc 



198 



CAPITULO LXYIIII Como desq bolvimos 
con cortes de Qinpanqingo con bastimen- 
tos y hallamos en nro rreal ^iertas platicas 
y lo q cortes rrespondio A ellas 

bueltos De cunpanzingo, q ansi se dize, Con los bastimentos 
y muy contentos, En dexallos de paz hallamos En el rreal, 
corrillos y platicas, sobre los grandisimos peligros En q cada 
dia Estavamos, En aquella guerra, y desq ovimos llegado, 
abivaron mas la platica y los q mas En ello hablavan E asis- 
tian, Eran los q En la ysla de Cuba dexavan sus casas y rre- 
partimientos de yndios, y juntaronse hasta siete dellos, q 
Aqui no quiero nonbrar por su onor, y fueron Al rrancho y 
aposento de cortes, y vno dellos, q hablo por todos, que te- 
nia buena espesiva, y avn tenia bien En la memoria lo q 
avia de proponer, dixo como A man era de Aconsejarle a cor- 
tes, q mirase qual andavamos, malamente, heridos, y jflacos, 
y corridos y los grandes trabajos q teniamos, Ansi de noche, 
Con belas y con espias y rrondas y corredores del canpo, 
Como de dia e de noche peleando, y por la Cuenta q an Echa- 
do, q desq salimos de cuba faltavan ya sobre §inquenta y 
ginco Conpafieros y q no sabemos de los de la villa rrica q 
dexamos poblados, E que pues dios nos avia dado vitoria 
En las batallas y rreEncuentros, desq venimos de Cuba 
E en aquella provin§ia, Abiamos avido, y con su gran miseri- 
cordia nos sostenia E q no le debiamos tentar tantas vezes, 
E que no quiera ser peor que pedro carbonero, que nos Avia 
metido En parte q no se Esperava, sino q vn dia o otro 
Aviamos de ser sacrificados A los ydolos, lo qual plega A 
dios tal no permita, E q seria bien bolver A nra villa, y q 
en la fortaleza q hezimos, y Entre los pueblos de los totonaqs 
nros Amigos nos estariamos, hasta q hiziesemos vn nabio, q 
fuese a dar mandado a diego velasquez y a otras partes e ys- 



199 

las para q nos Enbiasen socorros E Ayudas, y q agora fue- 
ran buenos los navios q dimos con todos al trabes, o que se 
quedaran siquiera dos para nes^esidad si se ocurriese y q sin 
dalles parte dello ni de cosa ninguna por consejo de qnien 
no saben considerar las cosas de fortuna, mando dar con to- 
dos Al traves, y que plega a dios quel, ni los q tal Consejo 
le dieron no se Arrepientan dello y q ya no podiamos sufrir 
la carga, quanto mas muchas sobrecargas, y q Andavamos 
peores q bestias, porq A las bestias desq an hechos sus jor- 
nadas les quitan las albardas, y les dan de Comer y rrepo- 
san y q nosotros de dia y de noche sienpre andavamos Carga- 
dos de armas y calgados, y mas le dixeron quemirase En 
todas las historias Ansi de rromanos Como las de alexandro, 
ni de otros capitanes, de los muy nonbrados q En el mundo 
avido, no se Atrevio a dar con los navios al traves, y Con 
tan poca gente meterse En tan grandes poblazones, y de mu- 
chos guerreros como el A hecho y q paresge qs omezilla de 
su muerte y de todos nosotros E que quiera conservar su vi- 
da y las nras, E que luego nos bolviesemos A la villa rrica, 
pues estava de paz la trra y q no se lo avian dho hasta En- 
tonnes, porq no An visto tpo para Ello, por los muchos gue- 
rreros q teniamos cada dia por delante y En los lados y pues 
ya no tornavan de nuevo lo qual creyan q se bolverian, 
pues xicotenga con su gran poder no nos A venido a buscar 
aqllos tres dias pasados, que deve estar allegando gente, y q 
no debriamos Aguardar otra como las pasadas, y le dixeron 
otras cosas sobre El caso. E biendo Cortes que se lo DEzian 
Algo Como sobervios, puesto q yba a manera de Consejo, les 
rrespondio muy manzamente y dixo q bien conosQido tenia 
muchas cosas de las q avian dho, E que a lo que A visto y 
tiene creydo, que en el vniverso oviese otros Espafioles mas 
fuertes, ni Con tanto Animo ayan peleado y pasado tan Ex§e- 
sivos trabajos como Eramos nosotros, E que andar con las 
armas a la contina A cuestas y belas y rrondas, y frios, q si 
ansi no lo ovieramos hecho, ya fueramos perdidos, y por sal- 
var nras vidas q Aqllos trabajos y otros may ores Abiamos 
de tomar, E dixo, para ques sefiores Contar En esto cosas de 



200 

valentias, que verdaderamente nro senor Es servido Ayudar- 
nos, q quando se me Acuerda vernos ^^rcados de tantas capi- 
tanias de contraries, y verles Esgremir sue montantes, y an- 
dar tan junto de nosotros agora me pone grima Especial 
quando nos mataron la yegua de vna cuchillada, quan per- 
didos y desbaratados estavamos, y Enton§es conosgi vro muy 
grandisimo animo, mas q nunca, y pues dios nos libro de 
tan gran peligro q Esperan^a tenia q ansi avia de ser de alii 
Adelante, y mas dixo, pues En todos E^tos peligros, no me 
cono8§eriades tener pereza, q En ellos me hallava con voso- 
tros, E tuvo rrazon de lo dezir porq giertamente en todas las 
batallas se hallava de los primeros. E querido senores trae- 
ros esto A la memoria q pues nro senor fue servido guardar- 
nos, tuviesemos esperanga q ansi avia de ser Adelante, pues 
desque Entramos En la tierra, En todos los pueblos les pre- 
dicamos la santa dotrina, lo mejor q podemos, y les procura- 
mos de deshazer bus ydolos, y pues q ya viamos quel capitan 
xicotenga, ni sus capitanias no pares9en, y que de miedo no 
deve de osar bolver, porq les devieramos de hazer mala obra 
En las batallas pasadas, y q no podria ya juntar sus gentes, 
Aviendo ya sido desbaratado tres vezes y por esta cavsa te- 
nia confianga En dios y En su Abogado, senor sant. pedro, 
q rruega por nosotros, q Era fejies^ida la guerra de aquella 
provingia, y agora como Aveys visto traen de comer los de 
zinpanzingo, y quedan de paz, y estos nros vezinos, questan 
por aqui poblados En sus casas, y q En quanto dar Con los 
navios Al traves, fue muy bien Aconsejado, y q si no llamo 
alguno dellos Al consejo, Como A otros cavalleros, por lo 
que sintio En el arenal que no lo quisiera traer Agora a la 
memoria y quel Acuerdo y consejo que agora le dan es todo 
de vna manera quel que le podrian dar entonges y que mi- 
ren que ay otros muchos cavalleros En el rreal, q seran muy 
contrarios de lo q Agora piden y aconsejan, y que Encami- 
nemos sienpre todas las cosas A dios, y seguillas En su san- 
to servigio sera mejor, y a lo que sefiores dezis que jamas ca- 
pitan rromano de los muy nonbrados, an Acometido tan 
grandes hechos como nosotros dizen verdad, E Agora y ade- 



201 

lante, mediante dios, diran En las ystorias, que de esto ha- 
ran memoria, mucho mas que de los antepasados, pues como 
E dho todas nras Cosas, son En servi?!© de dios y de nro 
gran Enperador don carlos, y avn debajo de su rreta justi- 
gia y xpiandad, somos Ayudados de la misericordia de dios 
nro sefior, y nos sosterna, que bamos de bien En mejor. An- 
si que sefiores, no es cosa bien Agertada bolver vn paso atras, 
q si nos viesen bolver estas gentes, y los q dexamos de paz, 
las piedras se levantarian Contra nosotros y como Agora nos 
tienen por dioses, o ydolos, q ansi nos llaman, nos juzgarian 
por muy cobardes y de pocas fuer§as, y a lo q dezis de Estar 
Entre los amigos totonaques, nros Aliados, si nos viesen q 
damos buelta sin yr A mexico, se levantarian contra noso- 
tros, y la cavsa dello seria q como les quitamos q no diesen 
tributo a montezuma, Enbiaria sus poderes mexicanos con- 
tra ellos, para q les tornasen A tributar, y sobrello dalles 
guerra, y avn les mandara que nos la den A nosotros, y ellos 
por no ser destruydos porque les temen En gran manera, 
lo pornian por la obra, Ansi q donde pensavamos tener Ami- 
gos, serian Enemigos, pues desq lo supiese El gran montezu- 
ma q nos abiamos buelto q diria. En q ternia nras palabras, 
ni lo q Enbiamos A dezir, q todo Era cosa de burla, o juego 
de ninos. Ansi q senores mal alia, y peor aculla, mas vale 
questemos Aqui, donde Estamos, ques bien llano E todo 
bien poblado y Este nro rreal bien baste§ido, vnas vezes ga- 
Uinas E otras perros, grayias A dios no nos falta de Comer, y 
[ojal&] tuviesemos sal, ques la mayor falta q Al presente tene- 
mos, y rropa para guaresgernos del frio. E a lo que dezis, seno- 
res, q se ban muerto desq salimos de la ysla de Cuba ginquenta 
y §inco soldados, de heridas y hanbres, y frios, y dolengias, y 
trabajos, E q somos pocos, y todos los mas heridos y dolien- 
tes, dios nos da Esfuer§o por muchos, porq vista cosa Es, q En 
las guerras [se] gastan honbres y cavallos, E q vnas vezes co- 
memos bien, y no venimos al presente para descansar, sino 
para pelear quando se ofre§iere, por tanto os pido senores por 
md, q pues soys cavalleros y personas q Antes aviades de 
Esforgar A quien viesedes mostrar flaqueza, q de aqui ade- 

Bemal Dlai del Caatlllo.~27. 



202 

lante, se os quite del pensamiento la ysla de cuba, y lo q alia 
dexays, y procuremos hazer lo q sienpre aveys hecho como 
buenos soldados, q despues de dios, ques nro socorro E ayu- 
da, an de ser nros valerosos bra§08 y como cortes ovo dado 
Esta rrespuesta bolvieron aquellos soldados A rrepetir En la 
misma platica, y dixeron q todo lo q dezia Estava bien dho, 
mas q quando salimos de la villa, q dexavamos poblada nro 
yntento Era y avn agora Es yr A mexico, pues ay tan gran 
fama de tan fuerte §ibdad y tanta multitud de guerreros y q 
Aquellos tascaltecas dezian los de §enpoal, q Eran pa^ificos, 
y no avia fama dellos como de los de mexico y avemos Esta- 
do tan A rriesgo nras vidas, q si otro dia nos dieran otra ba- 
talla, como alguna de las pasadas, ya no nos podiamos te- 
ner de Cansados E ya q no nos diesen mas guerras, q la yda 
de mexico les pares§ia muy terrible Cosa, y q mirase lo q 
dezia y ordenava y cortes les rrespondio medio Enojado, que 
' valia mas morir por buenos, como dizen los Cantares, q bi- 
. vir deshonrrados, y Ademas desto que cortes les dixo, todos 
los mas soldados q le fuymos En al§ar por capitan, y dimos 
consejo sobre El dar al traves con los navios, diximos En 
alta voz, q no curase de corrillos ni de oyr semejantes plati- 
cas, sino q con El ayuda de dios, con buen congierto Este- 
mos Aper^ebidos para hazer lo q convenga, y ansi §esaron 
y todas las platicas. Verdad Es q murmuravan de cortes, y le 
. maldezian y avn de nosotros q le Aconsejavamos y de los 
. de genpoal, q por tal camino nos traxeron, y dezian otras cosas 
•no biendichas,masEn tales tienpos se disimulavan. En fin to- 
- dos obedes§ieron muy bien, y dexare de hablar en esto y dire, 
como los cagiques viejos de la cabegera de tascala, por mi me- 
morados, Enbiaron otra vez mensageros de nuevo A su ca- 
pitan general xicotenga, q En todo caso, q luego vaya de paz 
A nos ver, y Uebar de comer, porq Ansi esta ordenado por 
todos los Ca§iqs y pringipales de aquella tierra, y de guxal- 
^ingo y tanbien Enbiaron A mandar A los capitanes q tenia 
En su conpania, q si no fuese para tratar pazes, q En cosa 
ningu^ le obedesgiesen y esto le tornaron A Enbiar A dezir 
tres vezes, porq sabian ^ierto, q no les qrian obedes§er y te- 



nia determinado el xicotenga, q vna noche abia de dar otra 
vez En nro rreal porq para ello tenia juntos veynte mill 
honbres, y como Era sobervio y muy porfiado, Ansi Agora 
Como las otras vezes, no quiso obede9er y lo q sobrello hizo, 
dire Adelante — 



CAPITULO LXX Como El capitan xicoten- 
ga tenia Apergebidos veynte mill guerre- 
ros Escogidos para dar En nro rreal, y lo q 
sobrello se hizo. 




OMO mase Escasi E xicotenga El viejo y todos los 
mas Caciques de la cabegera de tascala, Enbiaron 
quatro vezes A dezir A su Capitan, que no nos die- 
se guerra sino q nos fuese A hablar de paz, pues estava §erca 
de nro rreal, y mandaron a los demas capitanes, q con el Es- 
tavan, q no le siguiesen, si no fuese para Aconpanarle si nos 
yva a ver de paz, y como El xicotenga Era de mala Condi- 
§ion, y poriSado y sobervio, acordo de nos Enbiar quarenta 
yndios Con comida de gallinas y pan, y fruta y quatro mu- 
geres yndias viejas, y de rruin manera, y mucho copal y plu- 
mas de papagallos, y los yndios que lo trayan al paresger crey- 
mos que venian de paz, y Uegados a nro rreal savmaron A 
cortes, y sin hazer Acato como suelen, Entrellos, dixeron, 
esto OS Enbia El capitan xicotenga, q comays, si soys tevles, 
bravos como dizen los de genpoal, E quereys sacrifigios, to- 
ma Esas quatro mugeres, q sacrifiqys, y podeys comer de sus 
Games y cora§ones, y porq no sabemos de q manera lo hazeys, 
por eso no las Emos sacrificado Agora delante de vosotros, 
y si soys honbres, come desas gallinas y pan y fruta, y si soys 
tevles mansos, ay os traemos copal q ya E dho ques como yn- 



204 

§ienso y plumas de papagallos, haze vro sacrifi9io con ello 
y cortes rrespondio, con nras lenguas, q ya les avia Enbiado 
A dezir q quiere paz, y q no venia A dar guerra, y les ve- 
nia A rrogar y manifests r de parte de nro sefior Jesuxpo, 
ques El En quien creEmos y Adoramos, y del Enperador 
don carlos, cuyos vasallos somos, q no maten ni sacrifiquen 
A ninguna persona, Como lo suelen hazer y q todos nosotros 
somos honbres de hueso y de came Como Ellos, y no tevles 
sino cristyanos y q no tenemos por costunbre de matar A 
ningunos, q si matar quisieramos, q todas las vezes q nos 
dieron guerra de dia y de noche, avia En ellos hartos En 
que pudieramos hazer crueldades, E q por Aqlla comida, q 
AUi traen, se lo Agrades9e, y q no sean mas locos, de lo q an 
sido y vengan de paz. y pares^e ser Aquellos yndios, q En- 
bio El xicotenga Con la comida, Eran espias, para mirar nras 
cho5as, y rranchos y cavallos y artilleria y quantos Estava- 
mos En cada cho5a y Entradas y salidas y todo lo q En nro 
rreal avia, y estuvieron Aquel dia y la noche, y se yvan vuos 
. con mensages A su xicotenga, y venian otros, y los amigos 
que trayamos de 9enpoal miraron y calleron En Ello, que 
no era cosa acostunbrada, Estar de dia y de noche nro« ene- 
migos En el rreal sin proposito ninguno, y q §ierto Eran Es- 
pias, y tomaron dello mas sospecha, porq quando fuymos al 
poblezuelo de §unpanzingo, dixeron dos viejos de aquel pue- 
blo A los de genpoal, qstava aper§ebido xicotenga co muchos 
guerreros para dar En nro rreal de noche, de manera q no 
fuesen sentidos y los de jenpoal Entonges tuvieronlo por bur- 
la, y cosa de fieros, y por no sabello muy de gierto no se lo 
avian dho A cortes, y supolo luego la dona marina, y ella 
lo dixo a cortes, y para saber la verdad, mado Apartar dos 
de los tascaltecas q pares§ian mas honbres de bien y confe- 
saron q Eran espias, y tomaronse otros dos y dixeron q Eran 
asi mismo espias de xicotenga, y todo a la fin q venian, y 
cortes los mando soltar y tomaronse otra vez otros dos, ni 
mas ni menos, y mas dixeron qstava su capitan xicotenga 
aguardando la rrespuesta, para dar Aquella noche con todas 
sus capitanias En nosotros, y como Coi-tes lo ovo Entendido, 



205 

lo hizo saber En todo El rreal, para qstuviesemos muy aler- 
ta, creyendo q avian de venir, Como lo tenian con9ertado, y 
luego mando prender hasta diez y siete yndios de aqllas es- 
pias, y dellos se cortaron las manos, y a otros los dedos pul- 
gares, y los Enbiamos A su sefior xicotenga, y se les dixo q 
por el atrevimiento de venir de aquella manera se les A he- 
cho agora Aquel castigo, E digan q vengan quando quisie- 
ren de dia y de noche, q alii le aguardariamos dos dias, y q 
si dentro de los dos dias no viniese, q le yriamos A buscar 
A su rreal y q ya ovieramos ydo A les dar guerra, y mata- 
lles si no [fuera] porq les qremos mucho y q no sean mas lo- 
cos, y vengan de paz, y como fueron aquellos yndios de las 
manos y dedos cortados, En aquel ynstante dizq ya xicoten- 
ga, qria salir de su rreal, con todos sus poderes para dar so- 
bre nosotros de noche como lo tenia Con^ertado y como vio 
yr a sus Espias DE aqlla manera se marabillo y pregunto la 
cavsa dello, y le contaron todo lo acaesgido, y dende enton- 
§es perdio El brio y sobervia y demas desto, ya se le avia ydo 
del rreal vna capitania con toda su gente con quien avia te- 
nido Contienda, y vandos en las batallas pasadas y pasemos 
adelante. 



CAPITULO LXXI Como vinieron A nro 
rreal los quatro prinqipales q abian Enbia- 
do a tratar pazes, y el rrazonamiento q hi- 
zieron, y lo q mas paso — 




^ STANDO En nro rreal sin saber q abian de benir de 
paz, puesto q la deseavamos En gran manera y es- 
• tavamos Entendiendo En adera§ar Armas y En ha- 
zer saetas, y cada vno En lo q avia de menester para en cosas 



206 

de la guerra, En este ynstante, vino vno de nros Corredores 
del canpo a gran priesa y dize q por el camino pringipal de 
tascala, vienen muchos yndios E yndias Con cargas, y q sin 
torger por el camino vienen hazia nro rreal E q el otro su 
conpafiero, de a cavallo, corredor del canpo Esta atalayando 
para ver A q parte van y estando En esto llego El otro su 
conpafiero, de a cavallo y dixo q alii muy Qerca venian de- 
rechos A donde Estavamos y q de rrato en rrato hazian pa- 
radillas, y cortes y todos nosotros nos alegramos Con aque- 
Uas nuevas porq creymos ser de paz, como lo fue, y mando 
cortes q no se hiziese Alboroto ni sentimiento y q disimula- 
dos nos Estuviesemos en nras cho9as y luego de todas aque- 
llas gentes q venian con las Cargas se Adelantaron, quatro 
prin^ipales que trayan Cargo de Entender En las pazes co- 
mo les fue mandado, por los ca§iques viejos y haziendo se- 
fias, de paz q Era Abajar la cabe§a se vinieron derecho A la 
cho§a y aposento de cortes. y pusieron la mano en el suelo 
y besaron la tierra E hizieron tres rreverengias y qmaron sus 
Copales y dixeron q todos los Caciques de tascala y vasallos, 
y aliados, y amigos, y confederados, suyos, se vienen a me- 
ter debaxo de la amistad y pazes de cortes y de todos sus 
hermanos los tevles q con el estavamos y que les perdone 
porque no ban salido de paz E por la guerra que nos An da- 
do porq creyeron y tubieron por §ierto q Eramos Amigos de 
montezuma y sus mexicanos, los quales son sus Enemigos 
mortales, de tienpos muy antiguos porq vieron q venian con 
nosotros, E en nra conpafiia muchos de sus vasallos, que le 
dan tributos y q con Engafios y tray§iones le qrian Entrar 
En su tierra, Como lo tenia de costunbre para Uevar rroba- 
dos hijos y mugeres y q por esta cavsa no creyan a los men- 
sageros q les Enbiamos y q demas desto, dixeron q los pri- 
meros yndios q nos salieron Adar guerra, ansi comoEntramos 
En sus tierras q no fue por su mandado y consejo, sino por 
los chuntales Estomies q son gentes como monteses y sin 
rrazon, q como vieron q Eramos tan pocos q creyeron de to- 
marnos A manos y Uebarnos presos A sus sefiores y ganar 
grafias con EUos, y que ^gora vienen a demandar perdon. 



207 

de su atrevim*? E q alii traen Aquel bastimento y q cada dia 
traeran mas y que lo rre§ibamos Con el amor q lo Enbian y 
que de ay A dos dias verna El capitan xicotenga, con otros 
Cagiques, y dara mas rrelagion de la buena voluntad, q to- 
da tascala tiene de nra buena Amistad y desque ovieron Aca- 
bado su rrazonamiento, abajaron sus cabegas y pusieron las 
manos En el suelo, y besaron la tierra, y luego Cortes les 
hablo con nras lenguas, con gravedad E yzo del Enojado E 
dixo, q puesto q abia cavsas para no los oyr, ni tener amis- 
tad con Ellos, porq desque Entramos por su tierra, les En- 
biamos a demandar pazes y les Enbio a dezir q les queria 
favoresger contra sus Enemigos los de mexico, E no lo qui- 
sieron creer y querian matar nros Enbajadores, y no conten- 
tos Con aquello nos dieron guerra tres vezes de dia y de no- 
che, E que tenian Espias y agechangas sobre nosotros, y En 
las guerras q nos davan les pudieramos matar muchos de 
sus vasallos, y no quiso, y q los que murieron, le pesa por 
ello y q Ellos dieron cavsa a ello, y q tenia determinado yr 
a donde Estan los cagiques viejos a dalles guerra, q pues 
agora vienen de paz, de parte de aquella provingia, quel lo 
rresgibe En nonbre de nro rrey y senor, y les agradesge El 
bastimento q traen, y les mando q luego vayan a sus sefio- 
res a les dezir vengan o enbien a tratar las pazes con mas 
gertificagion, y q si no vienen, q yriamos a su pueblo a les 
dar guerra, y les mando dar cuentas azules, para q diesen a 
los cagiques En sefial de paz y se les amonesto, q quando vi- 
niesen a nro rreal, fuese de dia y no de noche porq les mata- 
riamos, y luego se fueron aquellos quatro mensageros y de- 
xaron en vnas casas de yndios, algo apartadas de nro rreal, 
las yndias q trayan para hazer pan y gallinas y todo servigio, 
y veynte yndios q les trayan agua y lefia y desde alii ade- 
lante nos trayan muy bien de Comer, y quando aquello vi- 
mos, y nos paresgio q Eran verdaderas las pazes, dimos mu- 
chas gragias a dios por Ello, y vinieron En tienpo q ya 
Estavamos tan flacos, y trabajados, y descontentos, Con las 
guerras, sin saber El fin q abria dellas, qual se puede cole- 
gir, y En los capitulos pasados, dize el coronista gomara, lo 



208 

vno que cortes se subio En vnos pefiascos y q vio El pueblo 
de §inpan5ingo, digo questava tan junto a nro rreal q harto 
§iego Era El soldado q le queria ver, q no le via muy claro 
• tanbien dize q se le qrian amotinar y rrebelar los soldados 
^e dize otras cosas, q yo no las quiero Escrevir porques gastar 
palabras digo q nunca capitan fue obedesgido con tanto aca- 
to y puntualidad En el mundo segund adelante veran, E q 
tal por pensamiento paso a ningund soldado, desq Entramos 
En la tierra adentro si no fue quando lo de los arenales, y 
las palabras q le dezian En el capitulo pasado, Era por via 
de Aconsejarle y porq les pares^ia q Eran bien dichas, y no 
por otra via, porq sienpre le siguieron muy bien y lealmen- 
te, y quien viere su ystoria lo q dize creEra ques verdad, 
segund lo rrelata, Con tanta Eloquen^ia siendo muy contra- 
rio de lo q paso, y dexallo E Aqui y dire lo q mas adelante 
nos avino, Con vnos mensageros q Enbio El gran monte- 
zuma. 



CAPITULO LXXir. Como vinieron a nro 
rreal Knbajadores de montezuma gran se- 
nor de mexico, y del presente que traxe- 
ron — 

como nro senor dios, por su gran misericordia, fue servido 
darnos vitoria de aqllas batallas de tascala, bolo nra fama 
por todas Aquellas comarcas, y fue A oydos del gran mon- 
tezuma, A la gran ^ibdad de mexico, y si de antes nos tenian 
por tevles, q son como sus ydolos de ay adelante nos te- 
nian En muy mayor rreputa^ion y por fuertes guerreros y 
puso Espanto En toda la tierra, como siendo nosotros tan po- 
• cos y los tascaltecas de muy grandes poderes y los ven^imos, 
y agora Enbiarnos A demandar paz, por manera q monte- 
zuma gran senor de mexico, de muy bueno, q Era temio nra 
yda A su gibdad DEspacho 9inco pringipales, honbres de 



209 

mucha cuenta A tascala y nro rreal para darnos El bien ve- 
nidos y A dezir q se avia holgado mucho de la gran vitoria 
q ovimos contra tantos Esquadrones de contraries, y Enbio 
En presente obra de mill pesos de oro, En joyas muy rricas, 
y de muchas maneras labradas, y veynte cargas de rropa fi- 
na de algodon, y Enbio A dezir q queria ser vasallo de nro 
gran Enperador, y q se holgava porquestavamos ya gerca de 
su §ibdad, por la buena voluntad q tenia A cortes, y A to- 
dos los tevles sus hermanos q Con El Estavamos, q ansi nos 
llamavan y q viese quanto qria de tributo cada afio para nro 
gran Enperador q lo dara En oro y plata, y rropa y piedras 
de chalchivis, con tal q no fuesemos A mexico, y Esto que 
no lo hazia porq de muy buena voluntad no nos acogeria, 
sino por ser la tierra Esteril y fragosa, y que le pesaria de 
uro trabajo, si nos lo viese pasar E que por ventura quel no 
lo podria remediar, tan bien como qrria. Cortes le rrespon- 
dio, y dixo q le tenia En gran md la voluntad q mostrava, 
y El presente q envio y el ofresyimiento de dar A su mg El 
tributo q dezia.rrogo a los mensageros q no se fuesen hasta 
yr A la cabegera de tascala y q alii los despacharia, porq vie- 
sen en lo q parava aquello de la guerra, y no les quiso dar 
luego la rrespuesta porqstava purgado del dia antes, y pur- 
gose con vnas man§anillas, q Ay En las yslas de Cuba y son 
muy buenas para quien sabe como se an de tomar. dexare 
Esta materia y dire lo q mas En nro rrl paso. 



Beraal Dlas del CastiUo.— 28. 



210 



CAPITULO LXXIIL Como vino xicotenga, 
capitan general de tascala, a entender en 
las pazes, y lo que dixo y lo que nos avino. 




iSTANDO platicando cortes Con los Enbaxadores de 
monte§uma como dicho avemos y qria rreposar 
porqstava malo de calenturas y purgado de otro 
dia antes, vienenle a dezir, q venia El capitan xicotenga, 
con muchos Caciques y capitanes, y q traen cubiertas man- 
tas blancas y coloradas, digo la mitad de las mantas blancas 
y la otra mitad coloradas q Era su devisa y librea, y muy de 
paz, y traya consigo hasta §inquenta honbres pringipales q 
le aconpanaban y Uegado al aposento de cortes le hizo muy 
gran Acato En sus reveren§ia8 y mando qmar mucho copal, 
y cortes Con gran amor le mando sentar cabe si, y dixo El 
xicotenga quel venia de parte de su padre y de mase Escasi 
y de todos los Caciques y rrepublica de tascala, A rrogarle q 
les admitiese A nra amistad, y q venia a dar la obidienyia 
A nro rrey y senor, y a demandar perdon por aver tomado 
armas y avernos dado guerras y q si lo hizieron, q fue por 
no saber quien Eramos, porq tuvieron por gierto q veniamos 
de la parte de su Enemigo montezuma q como muchas ve- 
zes suelen tener astu§ias y mafias para Entrar En sus tierras 
y rroballes y saquealles, q ansi creyeron q les qria hazer 
agora, y q por esta cavsa procuravan defender sus personas 
y patria y fue for§ado pelear y q EUos Eran muy pobres, 
q no alcangan oro ni plata ni piedras rricas, ni rropa de al- 
godon ni avn sal para comer, porq montezuma no les da lu- 
gar A Ello para salillo a buscar y q si sus antepasados tenian 
Algund oro v piedras de valor q al montezuma se lo avian 
dado quando Algunas vezes hazian pages, v treguas, porque 



211 

no les destruyesen y Esto en los tienpos may Atras pasados, 
y porq al presente no tienen q dar q les perdonen q su pro- 
veza da Cavsa A ello, y no la buena boluntad. y dio muchas 
quexas de montezuma, y de sus Aliados, que todos Eran 
contra ellos, y les davan guerra puesto q se avian defendido 
muy bien, E q agora quisiera hazer lo mismo Contra noso- 
tros, y no pudieron, y aunq se avian juntado tres vezes Con 
todos sus guerreros y aunq Eramos yn vendibles y q Como 
conos§ieron Esto de nras personas, q quieren ser nros ami- 
gos y vasallos del gran senor Enperador don carlos, porq 
tienen por yierto q con nra conpafiia seran guardados y an- 
parados sus personas y mugeres E hijos y no Estaran sien- 
pre con sobresalto de los traydores mexicanos, y dixo otras 
muchas palabras de ofre§imientos de sus personas y §ibdad. 
Era Este xicotenga alto de cuerpo y de grande Espalda y 
bien hecho, y la cara tenia larga, E como oyosa y rrebusta, 
y hera de hasta treynta y §inco anos y En el paresger mos- 
trava En su persona gravedad, y Cortes le dio las gra§ias 
muy cunplidas con alagos q le mostro, y dixo q los rresgibia 
por tales vasallos de nro rrey y sefior, y amigos nros, y luego 
dixo el xicotenga q nos rrogaba fuesemos a su §ibdad, por- 
questavan todos los ca§iques y viejos y papas aguardando- 
nos con mucho rrego^ijo y Cortes le rrespondio quel yria 
presto, y q luego fuera, si no [fuera] porquestava Entendien- 
do En negOQios del gran montezuma, y como ay a despachado 
Aqllos mensageros quel sera alia, y torno cortes A dezir Al- 
go mas Aspero y con gravedad de las guerras q nos Abian 
dado de dia y de noche, E q pues ya no puede aver Enmien- 
da En Ello, q se lo perdona y q miren q las pazes, q Agora 
les damos, q sean firmes, y no aya mudamiento, porq si otra 
Cosa hazen q los matara y destruyra su gibdad y q no aguar- 
dase otras palabras de pazes, sino de guerra y como Aqllo 
oyo el xicotenga y todos los prin§ipales q con el venian, rres- 
pondieron a vna q serian firmes y verdaderas y q para Ello 
quedarian todos En rrehenes y pasaron otras platicas de 
Cortes a xicotenga, y de todos los mas prin§ipales, y se les 
dieron vnas quentas verdes y azules para su padre y para El 



212 

y para los demas caciques, y les mando q dixesen, q cor- 
t^s yria presto a su 9ibdad. E a todas Estas platicas y ofres- 
gimientos, Estaban presentes los Enbaxadores mexicanos, 
de lo qual les peso En gran manera, de las pazes porq bien 
Entendieron, q por ellas no les avia de venir bien ninguno, 
y desq se ovo despedido El xicotenga, dixeron a cortes los 
Enbaxadores de montezuma, medio rriyendo q si creya Al- 
go de aqllos ofresgimientos q Avian hecho de parte de toda 
tascala, que todo Era burla, y q no los creyesen, que Eran 
palabras muy de traydores y Enganosas, que lo hazian para 
que desque nos tuviesen En su gibdad En parte donde nos 
pudiesen tomar A su salvo darnos guerra y matarnos, y q 
tuviesemos en la memoria quantas vezes nos avian venido 
con todos sus poderes A matar y corao no pudieron y fueron 
dellos muchos muertos, y otros heridos q se querrian Agora 
vengar, con demandar paz fingida, y cortes rrespondio con 
senblante de muy Esforgado y dixo, q no se le dava nada, 
porq tuviesen tal pensamiento, como dezian, E ya que todo 
fuese verdad, quel olgara dello, para castigalles, con quita- 
lles las vidas, y q Eso se le da, que den guerra, de dia q de 
noche, ni que sea En el campo q En la §ibdad, q En tanto 
tenia lo vno como lo otro, y para ver si es verdad, q por es- 
ta cavsa determina de yr Alia, y viendo aquellos Enbaxado- 
res su determination rrogaronle q Aguardasemos alii En 
nro rreal, seys dias, porq querian Enbiar dos de sus conpa- 
iieros A su sefior montezuma y q vernian dentro de los seys 
dias, con rrespuesta y cortes se lo prometio, lo vno porq co- 
mo E dho Estava con calenturas, y lo otro, como aquellos 
Enbaxadores le dixeron aquellas palabras, puesto q hizo 
senblante No hazer Caso DEllas miro q si por ventura serian 
verdad hasta ver mas §ertinidad En las pazes, porq Eran ta- 
les q avia q pensar En ellas, y como En aquella sazon vio 
que Avian venido de paz, y En todo El camino por donde 
venimos de nra villa rrica de la Veracruz, Eran, los pueblos 
nros amigos y confederados Escrivio cortes A joan descalan- 
te, q ya E dho que qdo En la villa para Acabar de hazer la 
fortaleza, y por capitan de obra de sesenta soldados viejos y 



218 

dolientes, q alii quedaron, En las quales cartas les hizo sa- 
ber las grandes mds q nro sefior jesuxpo nos auia hecho En 
las vitorias q ovimos En las batallas y rreEncuentros desq 
Entramos En la proui* de tascala, donde agora ban venido 
de paz, y q todos diesen gragias a dios per ello, y q mirasen 
q sienpre favoresgiese A los pueblos totonaques nros amigos 
y q le Enbiase luego, En posta, dos botijas de vino q avia 
dexado soterradas En gierta parte senalada de su aposento y 
ansi mismo truxesen ostyas de las q aviamos traydo de la 
ysla de Cuba porq las que truximos de aquella Entrada ya se 
avian Acabado con las quales cartas, disq ovieron mucho 
plazer, y escalante Escribio lo que alia avia sub^edido, y to- 
do vino muy presto, y En aquellos dias. En nro rreal, pusi- 
mos vna cruz muy suntuosa y alta y mando Cortes a los yn- 
dios de ^inpangingo, y a los de las casas, questavan juntos 
de nro rreal, que lo Encalasen, y estuviese bien aderesgado. 
dexemos de Escrevir desto y bolvamos a nros nuevos ami- 
gos los Cagiques de tascala, q desque vieron que no yvamos 
A su pueblo, Ellos venian A nro rreal Con gallinas y tunas 
que Era tienpo dellas y cada vno traya del bastimento q 
tenia En su casa y con buena voluntad nos lo davan, sin 
q quisiesen por ello cosa ningu^ y sienpre rrogando A cor- 
tes q se fuese luego con ellos A su gibdad, y como Estava- 
mos Aguardando A los mexicanos los seys dias como les 
prometio, con palabras blandas les detenia, y cunplido El 
plazo, que avian dicho, vinieron de mexico, seys prinyipales 
honbres de mucha estima, y truxeron vn rrico presente que 
Enbio El gran montezuma, que fueron mas de tres mill pe- 
sos de oro En rricas joyas, de diversas maneras y dozientas 
piezas de rropa de mantas, muy rricas de pluma y de otras 
labores, y dixeron A cortes, quando lo presentaron, q su se- 
jQor montezuma se huelga de nra buena andanga, y que le 
rruega muy ahincadamente q En bueno ni malo, no fuese 
con los de tascala A su pueblo ni se confiase dellos, q le que- 
rian llevar alia, para rroballe, oro y rropa, porq son muy 
pobres, q vna manta buena de algodon no alcan5an, E q por 
saber, quel montezuma nos tiene por amigos y nos Enbia 



214 

aquel oro y joyas, y mantas lo procuraran de rrobar muy 
mejor. y cortes rres9ibio con alegria Aquel presente, y dixo 
q se lo ternia En md y quel lo pagaria al senor montezuma 
en buenas obras, y q si sintiese que los tascaltecas les pasase 
por el pensamiento, lo quel montezuma les Enbia A avisar 
q se lo pagarian con quitalles a todos las vidas y quel sabe 
muy §ierto q no haran villania ninguna y que todavia quie- 
re yr a ver lo q hazen y Estando En estas rrazones vienen 
otros muchos mensageros de tascala a dezir a cortes como 
vienen §erca de alii todos los ca§iques viejos de la c^beyera 
de toda la proui^ A nros rranchos y cho§as A ber A cortes, 
y a todos nosotros para llevarnos a su §ibdad, y como cortes 
lo supo, rrogo a los Enbaxadores mexicanos que aguardasen 
tres dias por los despachos para su senor porque tenia al pre- 
sente q hablar y despachar sobre la guerra pasada o pazes q 
Agora tratan y el los dixeron que Aguardarian y lo que los 
Caciques viejos dixeron A cortes, dire adelante — 



CAPITULO LXXIIII Como vinieron a nro 
rreal los Caciques viejos de tascala A rro- 
gar a cortes y a todos nosotros, que luego 
nos fuesemos con ellos a su gibdad y lo q 
sobrello paso. 

desque los ca5iques viejos de toda tascala, vieron q no yva- 
mos A su §ibdad, acordaron de venir En andas y otros En 
hamacas E a Cuestas, y otros a pie, los quales heran los por 
mi ya nonbrados, que se dezian mase Escasi, xicotenga el 
biejo e guaxologingo, chichimeca tecle, tecapaneca de tope- 
yanco, los quales Uegaron a nro rreal, con otra gran conpa- 
fiia de prin^ipales, y con gran acato hizieron A Cortes y a 
todos nosotros tres rreberen9ias, y qmaron copal, y tocaron 
las manos En el suelo, y besaron la tierra y el xicotenga el 



215 

biejo comen§o de hablar a Cortes destamanera, y dixo ma- 
linchi malinchi, muchas vezes te Emos Enbiado A rrogar, 
q nos perdones, porq salimos de guerra, E ya te Enbiamos A 
dar nro descargo, q fue por defendernos del malo de monte- 
zuma, y sus grandes poderes porque creymos q Erades de su 
i vando y confederados, y si supieramos lo q agora sabemos, 

' no digo yo saliros a rresgebir a los caminos, con muchos bas- 
timentos, sino teneroslos barridos, y avn fueramos por voso- 
[ tros a la mar, a donde teniades vros acales, q son navios, E 

[ pues ya nos aveys perdonado, lo q agora os venimos a rro- 

i gar yo y todos Estos ca§iques, Es q vays luego con nosotros, 

a nra §ibdad y alii os daremos de lo q tuviesemos, E os ser- 
- viremos con nras personas y haziendas, y mira malinche no ^ 
• hagas otra cosa, si no luego nos vamos, y porq tememos que 
por Ventura te abran dho esos mexicanos alguna cosa de 
. falsedades y mentiras, de las q suelen dezir de nosotros, no 
los creas, ni los oygas, q en todo son falsos, y tenemos En- 
.tendido, que por cavsa dellos, no as querido yr a nra §ibdad. 
y cortes rrespondio con alegre senblante, y dixo, q bien sa- 
bia, desde muchos afios, antes pasados, y primero q a estas 
sus tierras viniesemos, como Eran buenos, y q deso se mara- 
villo quando nos salieron de guerra, E que los mexicanos, 
que alii estavan aguardavan rrespuesta para su sefior mon- 
tezuma, E a lo que dezian q fuesemos luego a su gibdad, y 
por El bastimento q sienpre trayan E otros cunplimientos, 
que se lo agrades^ia mucho y lo pagara En buenas obtas 
E que ya se oviera ydo, si tuviera quien nos llevase los tepuz- 
ques, q son las lonbardas, y desque oyeron aquella palabria, 
sintieron tan to plazer, que en los rrostros se conosgio, y di- 
xeron, pues como por Eso as estado y no lo as dicho, y en 
menos de media ora traen sobre quinientos yndios de carga y 
otro dia muy de mafiana, comengamos A marchar, Camino 
de la cabe§era de tascala, Con mucho congierto, ansi artille- 
ria, como de cavallo, y Escopetas y ballesteros, y todos los 
demas, segund lo teniamos de costunbre ya abia rrogado A 
cortes los mensageros de montezuma, q se fuesen Con noso- 
tros para ver En q parava lo de tascala, y desde alii los des- 



216 

pacharia, y que En su aposento Estarian porq no rresyibie- 
sen ningund desonor porq segund dixeron, temianse de los 
tascaltecas. antes q mas pase Adelante quiero dezir, como En 
todos los pueblos por donde pasamos, E en otros donde te- 
nian noti^ia de nosotros, llamavan A cortes malinchi y ausi 
;lo nonbrare de aqui Adelante, malinche En todas las plati- 

• cas q tuvieremos con qualesquier yndios, ansi desta provin- 
. gia como de la ^ibdad de mex^ y no le Nonbrare cortes, sino 
. En parte q conbenga, y la cavsa de aberle puesto aqueste 
•"•nonbre Es como dona marina, nralengua, Estava sienpre en 
*su conpania, Esj^e^ial quando venian Enbajadores, o plati- 

• cas de ca9iqs, y ella, lo declarava En la lengua mexicana, 
- por Esta cavsa llamavan a Cortes El capitan de marina, y 
. para mas breve le llamaron malinche, y tanbien se le qdo 

este nonbre a vn juan perez de artiaga vegino de la puebla, 
por cavsa q sienpre andava con dona marina y con gr"'® de 
aguilar deprendiendo la lengua, y a esta cavsa le llamavan 
juan perez malinche qs rrenonbre de artiago, deobradedoe 
anos a esta parte lo sabemos. E querido traer algo desto a la 
memoria avnque no avia para q, porq se Entienda El non- 
bre de cortes de aqui Adelante q se dize malinche, y tanbien 
quiero dezir q desq Entramos en tierra de tascala, hasta q 
fuymos A su yibdad se pasaron veynte y quatro dias, y En- 
tramos En ella a veynte y tres de setienbre de mill E quy*^8 
y diez y nueve afios y vamos a otro capit® y dire lo que alii 
nos avino — 



217 



CAPITULO LXXV Como fuymos a la (jib- 
dad de tascala, y lo que los caciques vie- 
jos hizieron, de vn presente q nos dieron 
J como truxeron sus hijas j sobrinas y lo 
q mas paso. 




OMO los cagiques vieron q comen5ava a yr nro far- 
daje camino de su §ibdad, luego se fueron adelan- 
te para mandar que todo estuviese muy aparejado 
pa nos rres§ibir y para tener los aposentos muy Enrramados 
E ya que Uegabamos a vn quarto de legua de la ^ibdad sa- 
lennos a rres^ebir los mismos Cagiques, que se avian Ade- 
lantado, y traen consigo sus hijos y sobrinos y muchos prin- 
yipales, cada parantela y bando y parcialidad por si, porq en 
tascala avia quatro pargialidades, sin la de tecapaneca, sefior 
de topeyanco que Eran §inco, y tanbien vinieron de todos 
los lugares, sus subjetos, y trayan sus libreas diferengiadas 
q avnq Eran de Enequen, Eran muy primas y de buenas la- 
bores, y pinturas, porq algodon no lo alcangavan y luego vi- 
nieron los papas de toda la provin§ia q avia muchos, por 
los grandes adoratorios q tenian, q ya E dho q Entrellos se 
dizen Cues, que son donde tienen sus ydolos y sacrifican, y 
trayan aquellos papas, braseros Con adquas, de brasas y con 
sus Engensos, savmando a todos nosotros, y trayan vestidos, 
algunos dellos, rropas muy largas, A manera de sobre pelli- 
zes y eran blancas, y trayan capillas En ellos, querian pa- 
res^er como a las de los que traen los canonigos, como ya lo 
tengo dho y los cabellos muy largos, y Engrefiados, que no 
se pueden desparzir, si no se cortan, y Uenos de sangre q les 
salia de las orejas, q En aquel dia se avian sacrificado, y 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo.— 21l| 



218 

abajavan las cabejas, como a manera de vmildad quando nos 
bieron, y trayan los vfias de los dedos de las manos muy lar- 
gas, E oymos dezir q aqllos papas tenian por religiosos y de 
buena vida, y junto a cortes se allegaron muchos prin9ipales, 
aconpafiandole y desq entramos En lo poblado, no cabian 
por las calles y agoteas, de tantos yndios E yndias, q nos sa- 
lian a ver con rrostros muy Alegres, y truxeron obra de veyn- 
te pinas, hechas de muchas rrosas de la trra diferen9iada.s 
las colores, y de buenos olores y las dan a cortes y a los de- 
mas soldados, que les pares^ian capitanes, EspeQial a los de 
cavallo, y desque llegamos a vnos buenos patios, a donde es- 
tavan los aposentos, tomaron luego por la mano A Cortes, y 
xicotenga El viejo, y mase Escasi, E le meten En los aposen- 
tos y alii tenian aparejado para Cada vno de nosotros a su 
vsan9a vnas Camillas desteras, y mantas de Enequen, y tan- 
bien se aposentaron los amigos q trayamos de §enpoal y de 50- 
cotlan, §erca de nosotros, mando cortes que los mensageros 
del gran montezuma, se aposentasen junto con su aposento, 
y puesto questavamos En trra que viamos claramente, ques- 
tavan de buenas voluntades y muy de paz, no nos descuy- 
davamos destar muy Apergebidos segund lo teniamos de cos- 
tumbre, y aparesge ser que vn capitan a quien cabia el quarto 
de poner corredores del canpo, y espias, y velas, dixo a cor- 
tes, pare§e senor questan muy de paz, no avemos menester 
tanta guarda, ni estar tan rrecatados, como solemos, y cortes 
dixo, mira senores, bien veo lo que dezis mas por la buena 
costumbre, Emos de Estar apergebidos, q avnq sean muy bue- 
nos, no avemos de creEr En su paz, sino como si nos quisie- 
sen dar guerra y los viesemos venir, A Encontrar con noso- 
tros, q muchos capitanes, por se confiar, y descuydo fueron 
desbaratados, Especialmente nosotros, como somos tan pocos, 
y aviendonos Enviado avisar El gran montezuma puesto q 
sea fingido y no verdad, Emos destar muy alerta. dexemos de 
hablar de tantos Cunplimientos, E orden como teniamos En 
nras velas, y guardas y bolvamos a dezir, Como xicotenga El 
viejo, y mase Escasi q Eran grandes Cagiques, se Enojaron 
mucho Con cortes y le dixeron con nras lenguas malinche, 



219 

o tu nos tienes por Enemigos, o no muestras obras En lo q 
te vemos hazer q no tienes confianga de nras personas y En 
las pazes q nos As dado, y nosotros a ti, y esto te dezimos 
porq vemos q ansi os velays, y venis por los caminos, aper- 
^ 9ebidos como quando veniades A Encontrar con nros esqua- 
^ drones, y Esto malinche, creEmos q lo hazes por las tray^io- 
nes y maldades q los mexicanos te an dho En secreto, para 
questes mal con nosotros, mira no los Creas q ya Aqui Estas 
y te daremos todo lo que quisieres, hasta nras personas E hi- 
jos y moriremos por vosotros, por eso demanda En rrehenes 
lo q fuere tu voluntad. y cortes y todos nosotros estavamos 
espantados de la gragia y amor con que lo dezian, y cortes 
les rrespondio q ansi lo tiene creydo y que no a menester 
rrehenes, sino ver sus muy buenas voluntades E q En quan- 
to a venir aper^ebidos, q sienpre lo teniamos de costunbre y 
q no lo tuviese a mal, y por todos los ofresgimientos, se lo 
tenia En md y lo pagaria El tienpo andando y pasadas Es- 
tas platicas, vienen otros prin§ipales, con muy gran Aparato 
de gallinas y pan d!e mayz y tunas y otras cosas de legun- 
bres, q avia En la trra, y baste9en El rreal muy cumplida- 
mente, q En veynte dias q alii Estuvimos, sienpre lo ovo 
muy sobrado, y Entramos En esta gibdad, como dho es, En 
veynte y tres dias del mes de setienbre, de mill E quinien- 
tos y diez y nueve anos. E quedarse A Aqui y dire lo q mas 
paso — 



220 




CAPITULO LXXVI Como se dixo misa, Es- 
tando presentes muchos Cacjiques y de vn 
presente que truxeron los cacjiques viejos. 



TRO dia de mafiana mando Cortes, q se pusiese vn 
altar para q se dixese misa, porq ya teniamos vino 
E ostias, la qual misa dixo £1 clerigo juan diaz, 
porquel padre de la ind, estava Con calenturas y muy flaco, 
y estando presente mase Escasi y El viejo xieotenga, y otros 
caciques y Acabada la misa, Cortes se Entro En su aposento 
y con el parte de los soldados, q le soliamos Aconpafiar, y 
tanbien los dos Ca§iques viejos, y dixole El xieotenga, que 
le querian traer vn presente y cortes les mostraba mucho 
amor, y les dixo q quando quisiesen, y luego tendieron vnas 
Esteras y vna manta Engima, y truxeron seys o siete peze- 
zuelas de oro, y piedras de poco valor y §iertas cargas de rro- 
pa de Enequen, q todo Era muy pobre, q no valia veynte 
pesoS; y quando lo davan dixeron Aquellos Ca^iqs rriendo, 
malinche bien creEmos, q como es poco Eso q te damos, no 
lo rres§ibiras con buena voluntad, ya te Emos enbiado A de- 
. zir q somos pobres, E q no tenemos oro, ni ningunas rriqzas, 
y la cavsa dello Es q Esos traydores y malos de los mexica- 
nos, y montezuma, q Agora Es sefior, nos lo an sacado to- 
do quanto soliamos tener, por pazes y treguas, q les deman- 
davamos porque no nos diesen guerra, y no mires qs de 
poco valor, sino rregibelo con buena voluntad, Como cosa 
de amigos, y servidores q te seremos, y Entonges tanbien tru- 
xeron apartadamente, mucho baatimento. Cortes lo rresjibio 
con alegria, y les dixo, q En mas tenia Aquello por ser de su 
mano y con la voluntad q se lo davan, q si les truxeran otros 
vna casa llena de oro En granos, y q Ansi lo rresgibe, y les 



221 

m 

mostro mucho amor / y pares^e ser tenian con^ertado Entre 
todos los Ca^iqs de darnos sua hijas y sobrinas, las mas her- 
mosas q tenian que faesen donzellas por casar, y dixo El 
viejo xicotenga, malinche, porq mas claramente conozcays 
£1 bien q os qremos, y deseamos En todo contentaros, noso- 
tros OS qremos dar nras hijas, para q sean vras mugeres y 
hagays generation, porq qremos teneros por hermanos, pues 
.soys tan buenos y esfor^ados. yo tengo vna hija muy hermo- 
ta^ E no a sido casada, y quierola para voz, y ansi mismo 
mase Escasi y todos los mas Caciques, dixeron q traerian sus 
hijas, y q las rres^ibiesemos por mugeres, y dixeron otras 
muchas palabras y ofresfimientos y En todo El dia no se 
quitavan Ansi El mase Esca9i como El xicotenga, de Cabe 
cortes, y como Era fiego, de viejo, el xicotenga, Con la ma- 
no Atentava a cortes En la cabeya y En las barvas y rros- 
tro y por todo El cuerpo. y cortes les rrespondio, A lo de las 
mugeres quel y todos nosotros se lo teniamos En md E q En 
buenas obras se lo pagariamos El tienpo andando, y Estava 
alii presente El padre de la md y cortes le dixo, Senor Pa- 
dre, pares^eme q sera Agora bien q demos vn tiento a Estos 
caciques para q dexen sus ydolos, y no sacrifiquen, porq 
qualquier cosa haran q les mandaremos por cavsa del gran 
temor q tienen A los mexicanos, y el frayle dixo Sefior bien 
Es, y dexemoslo hasta q trayan las hijas y Enton^es abra 
materia para ello, y hara v. m. q no las quiere rres^ebir has- 
ta q prometan de no sacrificar, si Aprovechare, bien, si no 
haremos lo q somos obligados, y ansi se quedo, para otro dia, 
y lo q se hizo se dira Adelante — 



CAPITULO LXXVII Como truxeron las hi- 
jas A presentar A cortes, y a todos noso- 
tros, y lo q sobre Kilo se hizo. — 

otro dia vinieron los mismos Caciques viejos y truxeron gin- 
co yndias hermosas donzellas y mo^ y para ser yndias eran 



de buen pares§er y bien ataviadas, y trayan para cada yndia 
otra yndia mo^a para su servi§io y todas l^Tsm hijas de caci- 
ques, y dixo xicotenga A cortes, malinche Esta Es mi hija, 
E no ha sido casada que es donzella y tomalda para voz, la 
qual le dio por la mano, y las demas q las diese a los Capi- 
tanes y cortes se lo Agradesgio, y con buen senblante q mos- 
tro dixo, quel las rrescibia y tomava por suyas, y q agora al 
presente q las tuviesen En poder sus padres, y preguntaron 
los mesmos ca§iqs q por q cavsa no las tomavamos Agora, y 
cortes rrespondio porq quiere hazer primero lo q manda dios 
nro seflor ques En el q creEmos y Adoramos y a lo q le En- 
bio El rrey nro sefior, ques quiten sus ydolos y q no sacrifi- 
quen ni maten mas honbres, ni hagan otras torpedades ma- 
las q suelen hazer, y crean En lo q nosotros creEmos, ques 
vn solo dios verdadero, y se les dixo otras muchas cosas to- 
cantes a nra santa fee, y verdaderam^ fueron muy bien de- 
claradas, porq dona marina y aguilar, nras lenguas, Estavan 
ya tan Espertos En ello, q se lo davan A Entender muy 
bien, y se les mostro vna ymagen de nra seiiora, con su hijo 
pres§ioso En los bragos, y se les dio A Entender como aqlla 
ymagen Es figura, como nra sefiora, q se dize santa maria 
qsta En los altos gielos, y es la madre de nro sefior qs aql 
- nifio Jesu, q tiene En los bragos y q le congibio por gragia 
^ -Aiespiritu s*? qdando virgen antes del parto y En el parto y 
despues del parto y aqsta gran sefiora rruega por nosotros a 
su hijo pregioso ques nro dios y sefior, y se les dixo otras 
muchas Cosas q se Convenian dezir sobre nra Santa fee y q 
si quieren ser nros her"f" y tener amistad verdadera con nos- 
otros y pa q con mejor voluntad tomasemos Aqllas sus hi- 
jas, para tenellas como dizen por mugeres, q luego dexen sus 
malos ydolos y crean y adoren En nro Sefior dios, qs El En 
q nosotros creEmos y adoramos y veran quanto bien les yra 
porq dema£ de tener salud. y buenos tenporales, sus cosas se 
les hara prosperam^, y quando se mueran yran sus animas A 
los gielos A gozar de la gloria perdurable, y q si hazen los sa- 
crifigios q suelen hazer aqllos sus ydolos, q son diablos, les lie- 
varan A los infiernos, donde pa sienpre Arderan En bivas 



228 

llamas, y porq En otros rrazonami^s se les avia dho otras co 
sas a^erca q dexen los ydolos, En esta platica no se les dixo 
mas, y lo q rrespondieron a todo Es q dixeron, malinche, ya 
te Emos Entendido, antes de agora y bien creEmos, q Ese 
vro dios, y Esa gran Sefiora q son muy buenos, mas mira, 
agora veniste A estas nras Casas, El tienpo andando Enten- 
deremos muy mas claramente vras cosas, y veremos Como 
son y haremos lo q sea bueno, como quieres q dexemos nros 
tevles, q desde muchos afios nros antepasados tienen por 
dioses, y les ban Adorado y sacrificado, ya q nosotros, q so- 
mos viejos, por te conplazer lo quisiesemos hazer, q diran 
todos nros papas, y todos los vezinos y mo50s y nifios desta 
provingia, sino levantarse contra nosotros Espegialm^ q los 
papas an ya hablado Con nro tevl El mayor y les rrespon- 
dieron q no los olvidasemos En sacrifi§ios de honbres y En 
todo lo q de antes soliamos hazer, si no q toda Esta proui* 
destruyrian con hanbres pestilengias y gerras, ansi q dixe- 
ron e dieron por rrespuesta q no curasemos mas de les ha- 
blar En aquella cosa, porq no los avian de dexar de sacrifi- 
car, aunq les matasen, y desq vimos aqlla rrespuesta, q la 
davan tan de veras y sin temor dixo El padre de la md, q 
Era honbre Entendido, E teologo, sefior no cure v m de mas 
les inportunar sobre Esto, q no es justo, que por fuer§a les 
hagamos ser cristianos, y avn lo q hizimos En ^enpoal de 
derrocalle sus ydolos, no quisiera yo q se hiziera, hasta q 
tengan cono§imi° de nra santa fee, q Aprovecha quitalles 
agora sus ydolos de vn Cu y adoratorio, si los pasan luego a 
otros, bien Es q vayan sintiendo nras amonestagiones, q son 
Santas y buenas, para q conozcan adelante los buenos conse- 
jos q les damos, y tanbien le hablaron a Cortes tres caballe- 
ros q fueron joan Velasqz de leon y fran*!P de lugo, y dixe- 
ron A cortes, muy bien dize El padre, y v m con lo que A 
hecho cunple, y no se toq mas A Estos cagiqs sobre El caso, 
y ansi se hizo, lo q les mandamos Con rruegos q fue luego 
desEnbaragasen vn Cu, questava alii gerca, y Era nuevam^ 
hecho, E quitasen vnos ydolos, y lo encalasen y linpiasen, 
para poner En ellos vna cruz, y la ymagen de nra sefiora, lo 



224 

qual luego hizieron y en el se dixo misa se bavtizaron Aqllas 
Ca^icas, y se puso nonbre a la hija del xicotenga El ^iego, 
dofia luysa, y cortes la tomo por la mano y se la dio a p^ de 
alvarado, y dixo al xicotenga, q Aql A quien la dava Era 
su hermano y su capitan y q lo oviese por bien, porq seria 
del muy bien tratada, y El xicotenga rre^ibio contentam^ 
dello, y la hija o sobrina de mase Esca^i, se puso Nonbre 
Dona Elvira y Era muy hermosa y pares^eme que la dio A 
ju" Velasquez de leon, y las demas se pusieron sus nonbres de 
pila, y todas con dones, y cortes las dio A gon^alo de san- 
doval y a xpoval de oli y alonso de avila, y desto hecho, 
se le declaro a q fin se pusieron dos cruzes, E q Eran porq 
tienen temor del las sus ydolos y que a doquiera qstamos 
de asiento, o dormimos se ponen En los caminos E a to- 
do Estavan muy contentoSy antes q mas pase Adelante quie- 
ro dezir como de aquella Ca^ica, hija de xicotenga q se 11a- 
mo dona luysa, q se dio a p*? de alvarado, q ansi como se la 
dieron, toda la mayor parte de tascala la Acatavan y le da- 
van presentes y la tenian por su sefiora, y della ovo El pe- 
dro de alvarado siendo soltero vn hijo q se dixo don pedro 
E vna hija q se dize dofla leonor muger q agora Es de don 
Frangisco de la cueva buen caballero primo del duq de al- 
burqrq, E a avido En ella quatro o ^inco hijos muy buenos 
cavalleros, y aquesta senora dofia leonor Es tan Enyelente 
senora En fin como hija de tal padre, q fue comendador de 
Santiago Adelantado y governador de guatimala, y Es El 
que fue al peru con grande armada, y por la parte del xico- 
tenga gran senor de tascala y dexemos destas rrelagiones, y 
bolvamos A cortes q se ynformo de aquestos Caciques, y les 
pregunto muy por Entero de las cosa£ de mex^ y lo q so- 
brello dixeron, Es esto que dire — 



225 



CAPITULO LXXVIIL Como cortes pregun- 
to A mase EsCaqi E a Xicotenga, por las 
cosas de mexico, y lo que En la rrela5ion 
dixeron. — 

luego cortes aparto Aquellos Caciques, y les pregunto muy 
Estenso las cosas de mx^ y Xicotenga como Era mas avisa- 
d^j y grai^ senor tomo la mano A hablar y de quando En 
quando le ayudava mase Esca§i, q tanbien Era gran s' y di- 
xo q tenia montezuma tan grandes poderes de gente de gue- 
rra, q quando qria tomar vn gran pueblo, o hazer vn salto 
En vna provin§ia, que ponia En canpo giento y §inq** mill 
honbres, y qsto q lo tenia bien Esperimentado, por las gue- 
rras y Enemistades pasadas q con Ellos tienen, de mas de 
gient afios y cortes les dixo pues con tan to guerrero q dezis 
q venian sobre vosotros, como nunca os Acabaron de vender, 
y rrespondieron q puesto q algunas vezes les desbaratavan y 
les matavan, y llebavan muchos de sus^vasallos para sacrifi- 
car q tanbien de los contrarios qdavan En el canpo muchos 
muertos y otros presos, y q no venian tan Encubiertos q de- 
llo no tuviesen notiyia, y quando lo sabian, q se apergebian 
con todos sus poderes, y con Ayuda de los de guaxocingo, se 
defendian E ofendian, E q como todas las provin§ias y pue- 
blos q A rrobado montezuma, y puesto debajo de su domi- 
nie, Estan muy mal con los mexicanos, y trayan dellos por 
fuer9a a la guerra, no pelean de buena voluntad, antes de los 
mismos tenian avisos, y q A esta cavsa les defendian sus tie- 
rras lo mejor q podian y q donde mas mal les ha venido A 
la contina es de vna §ibdad muy grande qsta de alii vn dia 
de andadura q se dize cholula q son grandes traydores, y q 
alii metia montezuma secretamente sus Capitanias, y como 
estavan ^erca, de noche hazian salto, y mas dixo mase Esca- 
gi q tenia montezuma En todas las provin§ias, puestas guarni- 

Bernftl Dlac del Castillo.-^, 



I 



226 

5iones de muchos guerreros, sin los muchos q saca de la cib- 
dad, y q todas aqllas provinjias le tributavan oro y plata, 
y plumas, y piedras, y rropa de mantas, y algodon, E yndios, 
E yndias, para sacrifigar y otras para servir, y ques tan gran 
sefior, q todo lo q quiere tiene y que En las casas que vive, 
tiene llenas de rriquezas y piedra& y chalchivis, q A rrobado 
y tornado por fuerga A quien no se lo da de grado y q todas 
las rriquezas de la tierra Estan En su poder y luego conta- 
ron del gran servi^io de su casa q Era para nunca Acabar, 
si lo oviese Aqui de dezir, pues de las muchas mugeres q te- 
nia, y como Casava Algunas dellas, de todo davan rrela9ion, 
y luego dixeron de la gran fortaleza de su §ibdad de la ma- 
nera ques la laguna, y la hondura del agua, y de las calyadas 
q Ay por donde an de Entrar En la gibdad y las puentes de 
madera que tienen en cada calgada, y como Entra y sale por 
el trecho de abertura, q ay En cada puente, y como En al- 
§ando qualquiera de ellas, se pueden qdar Ayslados: entre 
puente y puente, sin Entrar En su §ibdad, y como esta toda 
la mayor parte de la gibdad poblada dentro de la laguna, y 
no se puede pasar de casa En casa, si no es por vna puente le- 
vadiza y tienen hechas, canoas y todas las Casas son de A50- 
teas y En las Agoteas tienen hechos a manera de manparos, 
y pueden pelear desde Engima dellas, y la manera como se 
provee la yibdad de agua duge desde vna fuente q se dize cha- 
pultepeq questa de la gibdad obra de media legua, va El agua 
por vnos Edifigios, y llega En parte q con canoas la llevan a 
vender por las calles, y luego contaron de la manera de las 
armas q Eran varas de a dos gajos, y tiravan con tiraderas q 
pasan qualesquier armas, y muchos buenos flecheros, y otros 
con langas de pedernales, que tiene vna braya de cuchilla, 
hechas de arte q cortan mas q navajas y rrodelas y armas de 
algodon, E muchos onderos con piedras rrolli§as, e otras Ian- 
gas muy buenas e largas, e espadas de a dos manos de nava- 
jas, y truxeron pintadas En vnos grandes pafios de Enequen 
las batallas que con ellos Avian avido, y la manera del pelear. 
y como nro capitan, y todos nosotros Estavamos ya ynforma- 
dos de antes de todo lo que dezian Aquellos cajiqs, Estorvo 



227 

la platica y metioles En otra mas honda, y fue q como avian 
EUos venido A poblar Aquella tierra, E de q parte viniero, 
q tan diferentes y Enemigos Eran de los mexicanos, siendo 
vnas trras tan jerca de otras, y dixeron q les avian dicho sua 
ante^esores, q En los tienpos pasados q avia AUi Entre EUos 
poblados honbres y mugeres muy altos de cuerpo, y de gran- 
des huesos, q porq Eran muy malos, y de malas maneras, q 
los mataron, peleando con Ellos, y otros q dellos qdavan, se 
murieron, y para q viesemos q tamaflos E altos Cuerpos te- 
nian, traxeron vn hueso, o ^ancarron de vno dellos y era muy 
grueso El altor tamano, Como vn honbre de rrazonable Esta- 
tura, y aql §ancarron Era desde la rrodilla hasta la cadera. 
yo me medi con El y tenia tan gran altor Como yo, puesto 
que soy de razonable cuerpo, y truxeron otros peda§os de 
huesos como El primero, mas Estavan ya comidos y deshe- 
chos de la trra, y todos nos Espantamos de ver Aqllos gan- 
carrones, y tuvimos por jierto, aver avido gigantes En Esta 
tierra, y nro Capitan Cortes nos dixo, q seria bien Enbiar 
Aquel gran hueso, a castilla para q lo viese su magestad, y 
ansi lo Enbiamos con los primeros procuradores q fueron/. 
tanbien dixeron Aquellos mismos cagiques, q sabian de sus 
antecesores, q les avia dho vn su ydolo, En quien Ellos te- 
uian mucha devogion, que vernian honbres de las partes de 
donde sale El sol y de lexos tierras, A les sojuzgar y sefio- 
rear, q si somos nosotros, q holgaran dello, q pues tan Esfor- 
gados y buenos somos — y quando trataron las pazes, se les 
acordo desto, q les avian dicho sus ydolos y q por Aquella 
cavsa nos dan sus hijas, para tener parientes, q les defiendan 
de los mexicanos, y desq aCabaron su rrazonamiento todos 
quedamos Espantados y deziamos, si por ventura dezian ver- 
dad, y luego nro Capitan Cortes les rreplico, y dixo, q gierta- 
m** veniamos de hazia donde sale El sol, y que por Esta cav- 
sa nos Enbio El rrey nro sefior, A tenelles por hermanos, 
porq tiene notigia dellos, y q plega a dios, q nos de gragia, 
para q por nras manos, E yntergesion, se salven, y diximos to- 
dos amen, hartos Estaran ya los cavalleros qsto leyeren de 
oyr rrazonamientos y platicas de nosotros a los tascaltecas, 



22d 

y Ellos a nosotros, querria Acabar ya, y por fuerja me E de 
detener En otras cosas que con ellos pasamos y es aquel bol- 
can, questa cabe guaxo^ingo Echava En aquella sazon, que 
estavamos en tascala, mucho fuego, mas q otras vezes solia 
Echar DE lo qual nro capitan cortes y todos nosotros como 
no aviamos visto tal, nos admiramos dello, y vn Capitan de 
los nros que se dezia diego de ordaz, tomole cobdi§ia de yr a 
ver que cosa Era, y demando ligengia A nro general para su- 
bir En el la qual li§en5ia le dio y avn de echo se lo mando, 
y llebo consigo dos de nros soldados, y §iertos yndios prin^i- 
pales de guaxojingo, y los prin§ipales que consigo llevava, 
ponianle temor con dezille, que desquestuviese A medio ca- 
mino de popocatepeque, que ansi Uaman aquel bolcan, no po- 
dria sufrir El tenblor de la tierra, ni llamas, y piedras, ni 
qeniqa. q del sale, E q Ellos no se atreverian A subir mas de 
a donde tienen vnos Cues de ydolos que llaman los tevles 
de popocatepeque, y todavia El diego de ordaz con sus dos 
conpafieros, fue su camino hasta Uegar Arriba, y los yndios 
que yvan En su conpafiia, se le quedaron en lo baxo, que no 
se atrevieron a subir, y paresge ser, segund dixo despues El 
ordas, y los dos soldados que al subir q comen^o El bolcan, 
de echar grandes llamaradas de fuego, y piedras, medio qma- 
das y livianas y mucha §eni§a, y que tenblava toda aquella 
sierra y montana, A donde Esta El bolcan, y questuvieron 
quedos, sin dar mas paso adelante, hasta de ay a vna ora que 
sintieron que avia pasado aquella llamarada, y no Echava 
tanta geniya ni humo y que subieron hasta la boca, que Era 
muy rredonda y ancha, y que abria En el anchor vn quarto 
de legua, y que desde alii se pares§ia la gran Qibdad de me- 
xico, y toda la laguna y todos los pueblos questan En ella 
poblados, y esta este bolcan de mexico obra de doze o treze 
leguas, y despues de bien bisto muy gozoso. El ordas, E ad- 
mirado de aver visto a mexico y sus ^ibdades, bolbio a tasca- 
la con sus conpafieros y los yndios de guaxocingo, y los de 
tascala, se lo tuvieron a mucho atrevimiento, y quando lo 
contavan al capitan Cortes y a todos nosotros, como En aque- 
lla sazon no lo aviamos visto, ni oydo, como agora, que sabe- 



22» 

mos lo que es y an subido Engima de la boca muchos espano- 
les y avn frayles fran5i8cos, nos admiramos Entonges dello, 
y quando fue diego de Ordas A castilla, lo demando por ar- 
mas A su magestad, E ansi las tiene agora vn su sobrino or- 
das, q biv^ En la puebla despues aca desquestamos En esta 
trra, no le avemos visto hechar tanto fuego ni con tanto rruy- 
do como al pringipio, y avn estubo jiertos afios, q no echava 
fuego, hasta El ano de mill E quinientos y treynta y nueve 
q Echo muy grandes llamas y piedra, y 9eniga. dexemos de 
eontar del bolcan, q agora q sabemos q cosa es, y avemos vis- 
to otros bolcanes, como son los de nicaragua y los de guati- 
mala, se podian aver callado los de guaxal5ingo, sin poner 
En rrela9ion y dire como hallamos en este pueblo de tascala, 
casas de madera, hechas de rredes, y llenas de yndios E yn- 
dias q tenian dentro, Encar5elados, y a 9ebo, hasta qstuvie- 
sen gordos para comer y sacrificar las qles car§eles les qbra- 
mos y deshizimos pa q se fuesen los presos q en ella esta van 
y los tristes yndios no osavan yr a cabo ningu**, sino estarse 
alii con nosotros y ansi Escaparon las vidas, y dende En ade- 
lante En todos los pu'^s q Entravamos, lo prim^ q mandava 
nro capitan Era qbralles las tales caryeles y Echar fu* los pri- 
sioneros y comundm** en todas Estas trras los tenian y como 
cortes y todos nosotros vimos aqlla gran crueldad, mostro 
tener mucho Enqjo de los cajiqs de tascala, y Be lo rrino 
bien enojado y prometieron q desde alii adelante q no ma- 
tarian ni comerian de aqlla manera mas yndios, dige yo que 
aprovechava todos aqllos prometimientos, que En bolviendo 
la cabe^a hazian las mismas crueldades, y dexemoslo ansi, y 
digamos como ordenamos de ir a mexico — 



iso 



CAPITULO LXXVrill Como acordo nro 
Capitan hernando cortes, que todos nros 
capitanes y soldados, q fuesemos a mexi- 
co, y lo que sobrello paso — 




lENDO nro capitan q avia ya diez y siete dias ques- 
tavamos holgando En tascala y oyamos dezir de 
las grandes rriquezas de montezuma y bu prospe- 
ra §ihdad, acordo tomar consejo con todos nros Capitanes y 
soldados, en quien sentia que le tenian buena voluntad para 
yr adelante, y fue acordado q con brevedad fuese «ra parti- 
da, y sobre Este camino ovo En el rreal muchas platicas de 
desconformidad, porq dezian vnos soldados, q Era cosa muy 
temerosa, yrnos a meter En tan fuerte {ibdad, siendo noso- 
tros tan pocos, y dezian de los grandes poderes del montezu- 
ma, y el capitan cortes rrespondia q ya no podiamos hazer 
otra cosa porq sienpre nra demanda y apellido fue ver al 
montezuma E que por demas Eran ya atros consejos y vien- 
do q tan determinadam^ lo dezia, y sintieron los del contra- 
rio pares^er que muchos de los soldados le ayudamos a cor- 
tes de buena voluntad con dezir Adelante En buen ora, no 
ovo mas contradizion y los q andavan En estas platicas Con- 
trarias, Eran de los q tenian En cuba haziendas, q yo y otros 
pobres soldados ofresQido teniamos sienpre nras animas A 
dios q las crio, y los cuerpos A heridas y trabajos, hasta mo- 
rir En servi§io de nro sefior dios, y de su magestad. pues 
viendo xicotenga, y mase Esca^i, sefiores de taxcala, q de 
hecho qriamos yr a mx®?, pesa vales En el alma, y sienpre 
estavan con cortes, avisandole, q no curase de yr aquel ca- 
mino, y q no se confiase poco ni mucho de montezuma, ni 
de ningun mexicano, E que no se creyese de sus grandes re- 



J 



281 

veren§ias^ni de sus palabras, tan vmilldesy llenas de corte- 
sias, ni avn de quantos presentes le a Enbiado, ni de otros 
ningunos ofresijimientos, q todos Erau de Atray dorados, q En 
vn ora se lo tornarian A tomar quanto le avian dado y q de 
noche y de dia se guardase muy bien dellos, porq tienen 
bien Entendido que quando mas descuydados estuviesemos 
nos darian guerra, y q quando peleasemos con ellos, q los 
q pudiesemos matar q Ho qdasen con las vidas, al man^ebo, 
porq no tome armas Al viejo porq no de consejo, y le dixe- 
ron otros muchos avisos, y nro capitan les dixo, que se lo 
Agradesgia El buen consejo, y les mostro mucho amor, con 
ofresgimientos, y dadivas q luego les dio al viejo xicotenga 
y al mase Esca^i, y a todos los mas caciques y les dio mu- 
cha pte de la rropa fina de mantas q abia presentado mon- 
tezuma, y les dixo, que seria bueno tratar pa§e8 Entrellos y 
los mexicanos, para q tuviesen amistad y truxes^n sal y al- 
godon, y otras mercaderias y el xicotenga rrespondio, que 
Eran por demas las pa5es, y q su Enefnistad tienen sienpre 
En los cora§ones Arraigada, y q son tales los mexicanos q 
so color de las pages, les haran mayores traygiones, porq ja- 
mas mantienen verdad En cosa ninguna q prometen, E q no 
curase de hablar En ellas, sino que le tornavan a irogar, q 
se guardase muy bien de no caer En manos de tan malas 
gentes, y estando platicando sobre El camino q aviamos de 
Uebar para mexico, porq los Enbaxadores de montezuma, 
questavan con nosotros, que yvan por guias, dezian que el 
mejor camino y mas llano. Era por la gibdad de cholula 
por ser vasallos del gran montezuma, donde rregibiriamos 
servi^io, y A todos nosotros nos pares§io bien, q fuesemos 
Aquella ^ibdad y los cagiques de tascala, Entendieron q nos 
qriamos yr por donde nos Encaminavan los mexicanos, seEn- 
triste§ieron y tornaron A dezir q en todo caso fuesemos por 
guaxogingo, q Eran sus parientes y nros amigos, e no por 
cholula, porque En cholula, sienpre tiene montezuma sus 
tratos dobles Encubiertos y por mas q nos dixeron y aconse- 
jaron q no Entrasemos En aqlla §ibdad, sienpre nro capitan 
con nro consejo, muy bien platicado, Acordamos de yr por 



232 

cholula, lo vno porq dezian todos q Era grande poblazon, y 
muy bien torreada, y de altos y grandes Cues, y En vn buen 
llano Aseutada q verdaderam^ de lexos pares§ia, En aqlla 
sazon, a nro valladolid, de castilla la vieja y lo otro porqsta- 
va En partes §ercana de grandes poblazones, y tener muchoe 
bastimentos, y tan a la mano a nros amigos los de tascak, 
y con ynten^'ion destarnos alii, hasta ver de q manera po- 
driamos yr A mx^ sin tener guerra, porq Era de temer El 
gran poder de mexicanos, si dios nro selBor prim*m*f no po- 
nia su divina ma^ y misericordia con q sienpre nos ayudava 
y dava esfuergo, no podiamos Entrar de otra manera y des- 
pues de muchas platicas y acuerdos, nro Camino fue por cho- 
lula y luego cortes m^'J* q fuesen mensageros A les dezir q 
como estando tan yerca de nosotros, no nos enbian a visitar 
y hazer aql acato, q son obligados, a mensageros como somos 
de tan gran rrey y senor como es el q nos enbio A notificar 
su salvayion y q le rruega, q luego viniesen todos los caci- 
ques y papas de aqlla §ibdad, a nos ver y dar la obidiengia 
a nro rrey y sefior, si no q los temia por de malas ynten§io- 
nes y estando diziendo esto, y otras cosas, q convenia Enbia- 
lles a dezir sobre este caso, vinieron A hazer saber A cortes 
como el gran montezuma Enbiava quatro enbaxadores, con 
presentes de oro porque jamas a lo que aviamos bisto enbio 
mensage sin presente de oro y mantas, porq lo tenian por 
afrenta enbiar mensages, si no enbiava con ellos dadivas, y lo 
que dixeron aqllos mensageros, dire adelant^. — 



J 



233 



CAPITULO LXXX. como El gran montezu- 
ma Enbio quatro prin^ipales honbres de 
mucha cuenta con vn presente de oro y 
mantas, y lo q dixeron a nro capitan. — 




ISTANDO platicando cortes con todos nosotros, y con 
los cagiqs de tascala sobre nra partida, y En las 
cosas de la guerra, vinieronle A dezir q llegaron 
aql pu** quatro Enbajadores de montezuma todos pringipales 
y trayan presentes, y cortes les m*^ llamar y desq llegaron 
donde estava hizieronle grande acato, y a todos los soldados 
q alii nos hallamos, y presentando su presente de rricas jo- 
yas de oro y de muchos generos de hechuras, que valia bien 
dos mill p^s, y diez cargas de mantas de muy buenas labo- 
res de pluma, cortes lo rresgibid con buen senblante y luego 
dixeron aqllos enbajadores, por parte de su senor montezu- 
ma q se maravillava mucho de nosotros, estar tantos dias 
Entre aqllas gentes pobres, y sin poligia, q avn para esclavos 
no son buenos, por ser tan malos y traydores y rrobadores, 
q quando mas descuydados estuviesemos de dia o de noche, 
nos matarian por nos rrobar, y que nos rrogava q fuesemos 
luego A su gibdad, y q nos daria de lo q tuviese y avnque 
no tan cunplido como nosotros meresgiamos y el deseava, y 
q puesto q todas las vituallas le Entran En su gibdad de 
Acarreto, q mandaria proveernos lo mejor quel pudiese. 
aquesto hazia montezuma, por sacarnos de tascala, porq su- 
po q aviamos hecho las amistades q dho tengo En el capitulo 
que dello habla y para ser perfetas avian dado sus hijas a ma- 
linche porque bien tuvieron Entendido, que no les podia ve- 
nir bien ningu^ de nras confederagiones. a esta cavsa nos §e- 

B«rnal Diw del CwtlUo.-^l. 



bava con oro y presentes, para q fuesemos A sus tierras Al 
de menos porque saliesemos de tascala. bolvamos a dezir de 
los enbajadores, q los conos§ieron bien los de tascala y dixe- 
ron a nro capitan que todos eran senores de pueblos y vasa- 
llos, con quien montezuma Enbiava a tratar cosas de mucha 
ynportangia. Cortes les dio muchas gragias a los mensageros 
co6 grandes quiri§ias y sefiales de amor, que les mostro y les 
dio por rrespuesta quel yria muy presto A ber al sefior mon- 
tezuma, y les rrogo questuviesen algunos dias alii con noso- 
tros, en aquella sazon acordo cortes q fuesen dos de nros ca- 
pitanes,personas senaladas,a ber y hablar al gran montezuma, 
E ver la gran §ibdad de mexico, y sus grandes fuer^as 
y fortalezas, E yvan ya camino pedro de albarado y bemal- 
dino Vazquez de tapia, y quedaron En rrehenes, quatro de 
aquellos Enbajadores, que avian traydo El presente, y otros 
Enbajadores del gran montezuma de los que solian estar con 
nosotros, fueron en su conpafiia, y porq En aql tienpo 
cortes avia enbiado asi a la ventura aquellos cavalleros, se lo 
rretruximos diximos que como enbiava a mexico, no mas de 
para ver ^ la §ibdad y sus fuer§as que no era buen Acuerdo 

1 En el original apareoe testado l6 siguiente: *'ver la gran ^ibdad de mexi- 
co, E sus grandes fuer^as y fortalezas y pares9eme que fueron pedro dalua- 
rado y bemaldino vazquez de tapia y quedaron en rrehenes quatro de aqilos 
Enbaxadores que avian traydo el presente, y los otros quatro fueron con ellos, 
y porque En aquel tienpo yo estava muy mal herido, harto tenia que curarme y 
no lo alcan9e a saber por entero ya Escrito a mexico a tres amigos mios que 
se hallaron En todas las mas conquistas, para que me enbien rrelagion, por- 
que no vaya ansi yn^ierto. Si no se pusiese aqui lo que sobrello dixeren, rre- 
mitome a los conquistadores para que lo Enmienden, mas se sin duda ningu- 
na, que bemaldino vazquez de tapia, yendo por el camino tuvo grandes 

calenturas y se quedo En vn pueblo q se dezia y quel pedro dealvarado yba 

a mexico, y se boluio del camino, y Entonyes aquellos quatro prinyipales que 
Uevava le pusieron por nonbre tonatio, que En lengua mexicana quiere dezir 
sol, y ansi le Uamavan de ay adelante, y pusieronle aquel nonbre, porque he- 
ra de muy buen cuerpo y ligero, y fa9iones y presen^ia, ansi En el rroetro, co- 
mo En el hablar. En todo hera agragiado, que pares^ia que se estava rriendo, 
y tanbien se lo que dicho tengo, que no llegaron los sobre dichos capitanes a 
mexico, porque cuando partieron de nro rreal, nos peso a todos los soldados de 
su yda y a nro capitan le diximos, que para que Enbiava dos tan Estremados 
varones que fuesen a la ventura, si los matavan, y luego cortes les Escribio En 



i 



286 

y q luego los fuesen a Uamar y q no pasen mas adelante y 
les escrivio q se bolbiesen luego, demas desto el bemaldino 
Vazquez de tapia ya Abia Adoles9ido en el camino de calen- 
turas y desq vieron las cartas, se bolvieron y los enbajado- 
res con quien yvan dieron rrelagion dello A su montezuma 
y les pregunto, q que manera de rrostros y propor§iones de 
cuerpos Uevaban los dos tevles que yban a mexico, y si Eran 
capitanes, y pares9e ser q les dixeron quel pedro de alvara- 
do, era de muy linda gra§ia Asi En el rrostro, como En su 
persona, y que pares§ia como al sol y que Era capitan y de- 
mas desto, se le llebaron figurado muy al natural, su dibujo 
y cara y desde Entonges le pusieron nonbre el tonatio, q 
quiere dezir El sol, o el hijo del sol, y asi le llamaron de 
alii adelante, y al bemaldino vazquez de tapia dixeron q Era 
honbre rrebusto, y de muy buena disposition q tanbien 
Era capitan, y al montezuma le peso, porq se avian vuelto 
del camino, y aquellos Enbaj adores tu vieron rrazon de con- 
parallos, Asi En los rrostros como en El aspecto de las per- 
sonaa y cuerpos como lo sinificaron A su sefior monte§uma 
porql p° de alvarado, Era^ de muy buen cuerpo y ligero, y 
fay9iones y presen§ia, ansi En el rrostro como En el hablar 
En todo Era agra9iado que paresgia q se Estava rriendo y 
el bemaldino vazquez de tapia. Era Algo rrebusto puesto q 
tenia buena presengia, y desq bolvieron a nro rrl nos hol- 
gamos con Ellos, y les deziamos, q no era cosa A§ertada, lo 
q cortes les mandava y dexemos esta materia pues no haze 
mucho A nra rrelagion, y dire de los mensageros q cortes 
enbio A cholula, la rrespuesta q enbiaron — 

poBta que se boluiesen no lo se bien, rremitome a los que se hallaron presen- 
ted, otros conquistadores me dixeron, que como El bemaldino vazquez de ta- 
pia, estava malo En vn pueblo, que se lo hizieron saber a montezuma sus men- 
sageros, y Enbio a mandar que no pasase de alii el ni pedro de aluarado, por- 
que si fueran a mexioo, no hera cosa para no se saber muy claramente [por] todos 
los soldados, boluamos a dezir de los mensageros que Enbio cortes a cholula, 
la rrespuesta que enbiaron, lo cual dire adelante. — " 



286 



CAPITULO LXXXI. Como Enbiaron los de 
cholula quatro yndios de poca valia, a des- 
culparse por no aver venido a tascala, y lo 
que sobrello paso. 




^A he dicho En el capitulo pasado Como Enbio nro 
capitan mensageros a cholula para que nos viniesen 
a ver a tascala los caciques de aqlla gibdad desque 
Entendieron lo que cortes les mandava, pares§iole8 que seria 
bien Enbiar quatro yndios de poca valia, a desculparse, E a 
dezir que por estar malos no venian, y no traxeron basti- 
mento ni otra cosa, sino ansi secamente dixeron aqlla rres- 
puesta, y quando vinieron estos mensageros estavan preeen- 
tes los cagiques de tascala, E dixeron a nro capitan, que para 
ha§er burla del y de todos nosotros, Enbiavan los de cholu- 
la aquellos yndios, E que heran ma§eguales E de poca call- 
dad, por manera que cortes les torno a Enbiar luego con 
otros quatro yndios de §enpoal avisandoles que viniesen den- 
tro de tres dias honbres prin§ipales, pues estavan ^inco le- 
guas de alii, E que si no venian que los ternia por rrebeldes, 
y que desque vengan, les quiere dezir cosas que les conviene 
para salua§ion de sus animas y puligia para su buen biuir, 
y tenerlos por amigos y hermanos, como son los de tascala, 
sus vezinos, y que si otra cosa Acordaren, y no quieren nra 
amistad, que nosotros procurariamos de les desconplazer y 
enojarles, y desque oyeron aquella Enbaxada rrespondieron 
que no avian de venir a tascala, porque son sus Enemigos 
porque saben que an dicho dellos, E de su senor monteyu- 
ma, muchos males, E que vamos a su ^ibdad y salgamos de 
los terminos de tascala, y si no hizieren lo que deven que los 
tengamos por tales, como les Enbiamos a dezir. E viendo 



2d7 

nro capitan que la EsCusa que dezian hera muy justa, acor- 
damos de yr alia, y deeque los caciques de tascala vieron que 
determinadamente nra yda hera por cholula, dixeron a cor- 
tes, pues que ansi quieres creher a los mexicanos, E no a 
nosotros, que somos tus amigos, ya te hemos dicho rauchas 
vezes, que te guardes de los de cholula, E del poder de me- 
xico, para que mejor te puedas ayudar de nosotros, tenemos- 
te aparejados diez mill honbres de guerra, que vayan en tu 
conpaflia, y cortes les dio muchas gragias por ello E consul- 
to con todos nosotros, que no seria bien que llevasemos tan- 
t08 guerreros, A tierra que aviamos de procurar amistades, 
E que seria bien que llevasemos mill y estos les demando, E 
que los demas que se quedasen En sus casas, E dexemos es- 
ta platica y dire de nro camino. — 



C APITULO LXXXIL como fuymos a la (jib- 
dad de Cholula^ y del gran rreqibimiento 
que nos hizieron. — 




NA manana Comengamos a marchar por nro cami- 
no, para la gibdad de cholula, E y vamos con el ma- 
yor congierto que podiamos, porque como otras ve- 
zes he dicho, a donde esperavamos aver rrebueltas, o guerras, 
nos apergebiamos muy mejor, E aquel dia fuymos a dormir 
a vn rrio que pasa obra de vna legua chica de cholula, a don- 
de Esta agora hecha vna puente de piedra, E alii nos hizie- 
ron vnas chogas E rranchos. E esta misma noche enbiaron 
los caciques de cholula mensajeros honbres pringipales, a dar- 
nos El parabien benidos a su tierra, E traxeron bastimentos 

1 Testado en el original: **En doze de otubre de mill e qui's y diez y niieve 
aiioB." 



de gallinas, y pan de su mays, E dixeron que en la manana 
bernan todos los cagiques y papas a nos rescibir, E que les 
perdonamos porque no avian salido luego y cortes les dixo, 
con nras lenguas dofia marina E geronimo de aguilar, que 
se lo agrades^ia, ansi por El bastimentp que trayan, como per 
la buena voluntad, que mostravan, E alii dormimos aquella 
noche con buenas velas E escuchas, E corredores del canpo, 
y desque amanes9io comen9amos a caminar hazia la 9ibdady 
E yendo por nro camino, ya Qerca de la poblazon nos salie- 
ron a rressebir los ca9iques, E papas, E otros muchos yndios, 
E todos los mas trayan vestidas vnas rropas de algodon, de 
hechuras de marlotas, como las traen los yndios 9apotecas, 
y esto digo a quien las a visto, E a estado en aquella provin- 
9ia, porque En aquella §ibdad asi se vsavan, E venian muy 
de paz, E de buena voluntad, y los papas trayan braseros con 
ensen9io, con que gahumaron A nro capitan, E a los solda- 
dos que 9erca del nos hallamos. E pare9er aquellos papas y 
prin9ipales como vieron los yndios tascaltecas q con noso- 
tros benyan, dixeronselo a dona marina que se lo dixese al 
general, que no hera bien que de aquella manera Entrasen 
BUS Enemigos con armas En su 9ibdad, y como nro capitan 
lo Entendio mando a los capitanes E soldados, y El fardaje, 
q parasemos, y desque nos vio juntos E q no caminaya nin- 
guno, dixo, pares9eme, sefiores, que antes q Entremos fen 
cholula, que demos vn tiento con buenas palabras a esto6 ca- 
9iques E papas E veamos ques su voluntad porq vienen mur- 
murando destos nros amigos tascaltecas, y tienen mucha rra- 
zon En lo que dizen, E con buenas palabras les quiero dar 
a Entender la cavsa porq venimos a su 9ibdad, y porq ya se- 
fiores aveys Entendido lo que nos ban dicho los tascaltecas, q 
son bulli9iosos y sera bien que por bien den la obidien9ia a 
su magestad, y Esto me pares§e q conviene, y luego mando 
a dofia marina q llamase a los ca9iques y papas. Alii donde 
Estava a cavallo, E todos nosotros juntos con cortes y luego 
vinieron trea prin9ipales y dos papas y dixeron malinche, 
perdonanos, porq no fuemos a tascala a te ver E llevar co- 
mida, no por falta de voluntad, sino porq son nros Enemi- 



289 

go8 mase Escape E xicotenga, E toda tascala, E que an dho 
muchos males de nosotros E del gran monte§uma nro sefior, 
E q no basta lo q ban dicbo sino que agora tengan atrevimi^ 
Con vro fabor de venir Con armas a nra ^ibdad, y que le 
piden por md, que les mande boluer A sus tierras, o al de 
menos que se queden En el canpo, E que no Entren de aque- 
11a manera En su ^ibdad, E q nosotros q vamos mucho En 
buen ora, E como el capitan vio la rrazon q tenian, mando 
luego a pedro de alvarado E al maestre de canpo, que hera 
xpoual de oli, q rrogasen a los tascaltecas q alii En el canpo 
hiziesen sus rranchos E cho§as, E q no Entrasen con noso- 
tros, sino loff q llevavan la artilleria, y nros amigos los de 
genpoal y les dixesen la cavsa porq se lo mandava hera porq 
todos aquellos ca§iques, E papas, se temen dellos, E q quan- 
do oviesemos de pasar de cholula pa mexico q los Enbiara a 
Uamar, E q no lo ayan por Enojo, y desq los de cholula vie- 
ron lo que cortes mando, pares^ian questavan mas sosegados, 
y les comen§o cortes a hazer vn parlamento, diziendo q nro 
rrey y sefior, cuyos vasallos somos tiene tan grandes poderes, 
y tiene debaxo de su mando a muchos grandes prinyipes, y 
caciques, y q nos Enbio a Estas tierras a les notificar y man- 
dar que no adoren ydolos, ni sacrifiquen honbres, ni coman 
de sus carnes, ni hagan sodomias ni otras torpedades, E que 
por ser El camino por alii para mexico, a donde vamos A 
hablar al gran monte§uma, y por ^o aver otro mas §ercano 
venimos por su ^ibdad y tanbien para tenelles por hermanos, 
E q pues otros grandes ca§iques an dado la obidien9ia a su 
magestad q sera bien que Ellos la den como los demas, E 
rrespondieron q avn no avemos Entrado En su tierra E ya 
les mandavamos dexar sus tevles q ansi llamavan a sus ydo- 
los, que no lo pueden hazer, y q dar la obidienyia a Ese vro 
rrey que dezis les plaze, y ansi la (Jieron de palabra E no an- 
te escrivano, y Esto hecho, luego comengamos a marchar 
para la gibdad, E Era tanta la gente que nos salia A ver, q 
las calles E a§oteas, Estavan llenas, E no me maravilla de- 
Uo, porq no avian visto honbres como nosotros ni cavallos, 
y nos Uevaron aposentar a vnas grandes salas En q estuvi- 



240 



raos todos E nros amigos los de §enpoal, y los tascaltecas q 
llevaron El fardaje, y nos dieron de comer, aquel dia E otro, 
muy bien E abastadamente — E quedarse aqui E dire lo q 
mas pasamos — 



CAPITULO LXXXIII. Como tenian con^er- 
tado En Ksta ^ibdad de cholula, de nos ma- 
tar, por mandado de montequma, y lo que 
sobrello paso — 

aviendonos rre^ebido tan solenemente como dicho tengo, E 
§iertamente de buena voluntad, sino q despues paresyio, En- 
bio a mandar monteyuma a sus Enbajadorea q Con nosotros 
Estavan, q tratasen con los de cholula, q con vn Esquadron 
de veynte mill honbres q Enbio montezuma q tenia aperye- 
bidos, para En Entrando En aquella ^ibdad, q todos nos die- 
sen guerra, de noche, o de dia, nos acapillasen, E los q pu- 
diesen llevar atados de nosotros A mex°®, q se los llevasen, 
E con grandes prometimientos que les mando E muchas jo- 
yas, E rropa q Entonges les Enbio, E vn atanbor de oro, E 
a los papas de aquella gibdad, q. avian de tomar veynte de 
nosotros para hazer sacrifigios a sus ydolos, pues ya todo con- 
gertado y los guerreros que monteguraa luego Enbio, Estavan 
En vnos rranchos E arcabuesos obra de media legua de cho- 
lula, y otros Estavan ya dentro En las casas, y to^os puestos 
a punto con sus armas E hechos manparos En las agoteas, y 
En las calles hoyos E albarradas, para que no pudiesen co- 
rrer los cavallos, y avn tenian En vnas casas llenas de varas 
largas E colleras de cueros, E cordeles, con que nos avian de 
atar e llevarnos a mexico, mejor lo hizo nro senor dios, que 
todo se les boluio al rreves E dexemoslo agora, E boluamos 
a dezir que ansi como nos aposentaron como dicho he nos 
dieron muy bien de comer los dos dias primeros, E puesto que 
los viamos questavan muy de paz, no dexavamos sienpre de 



241 

estar muy apergebidos por la buena costunbre que En ello 
teniamos, E al tercero dia, ni noe davan de comer ni pares- 
yia cayique ni papa, E si algunos yndios nos benyan a ver es- 
tavan apartados, que no se llegavan a nosotros, E rriyen- 
dose como cosa de buria, E desque aquello vio nro capitan, 
dixo a dona marina e aguilar nras lenguas que dixesen a los 
enbajadores del gran monte^uma, que alii Estavan, que man- 
dasen a los caciques traer de comer, E lo que trayan hera 
agua, E lena, E vnos viejos que lo trayan dezian que no te- 
nian mayz. E en aquel mismo dia vinieron otros Enbajado- 
res del monteguma, E se juntaron con los questavan con 
nosotros, E dixeron a cortes muy desvergongadamente, que 
su sefior les Enbiava a dezir que no fuesemos a su gibdad, 
porque no tenia que nos dar de comer, E que luego se que- 
rian boluer a mexico con la rrespuesta- E desque aquello vio 
cortes e le paresgio mal su platica, con palabras blandas, di- 
xo a los Enbajadores, que se maravillava de tan gran sefior 
Como es monte9uma, de tener tantos acuerdos, E que les rro- 
gava que no se fuesen a mex?*, porque otro dia se queria par- 
tir para velle E hazer lo que mandase y avn me paresge 
que les dio vnos sartalejos de cuentas E los Enbajadores di- 
xeron, que si aguardarian, fecho esto, nro capitan nos man- 
do juntar y nos dixo muy descongertada veo Esta gente, es- 
temos muy alerta, que alguna maldad ay Entre ellos, y luego 
Enbio a Uamar al cagique pringipal, que ya no se me acuer- 
da como se llamava, o que Enbiase algunos pringipales, E 
rrespondio questava malo, E que no podia venir y desque 
aquello vio nro capitan mando que de vn gran Cu, questava 
junto de nros aposentos, le truxesemos dos papas, con buenas 
rrazones, porque avia muchos En el, truximos dos dellos sin 
les hazer desonor y cortes les mando dar a cada vno vn chal- 
chuy que son muy Estimados entre ellos como esmeraldas E 
les dixo con palabras amorosas, que por que cavsa El cagique 
y pringipales, E todos los mas papas Estan amedrentados, que 
los a Enbiado a llamar E no an querido venir, y paresge ser 
quel vno de aquellos papas, hera honbre muy pringipal En- 
tre ellos, E tenia cargo, o mando. En todos los demas Cues 

Bernal Dlai del Castillo*- 



242 

de aquella jibdad que devia de ser a manera de obispo Entre 
Ellos y le tenian gran acato, E dixo que EUos que son pa- 
pas que no tenian temor de nosotros, que si El ca9ique E 
pringipales, no an querido venir quel yra a los llamar y que 
como El les hable que tiene creydo que no haran otra cosa, 
y que vernan, E luego cortes dixo, que fuese, y quedase su 
conpafiero alii aguardando hasta que viniese, E fue aquel 
papa E llamo al cacique E prin9ipales, y luego vinieron jun- 
tamente con el, al aposento de cortes, y les pregunto Con 
nras lenguas, que por que avian miedo, E que por que cav- 
sa no nos davan de comer y que si rres§iben pena de nra Es- 
tada En su §ibdad, que otro dia por la mafiana nos queria- 
mos partir para mexico, a ver E hablar al sefior monteguma, 
E que le tengan aparejados tamemes para Uevar El fardaje 
E tepuzqs que son las lonbardas, y tanbien que luego trayan 
comida, y el ca§ique estava tan cortado, que no a§ertava a 
hablar y dixo que la comida que la buscarian, mas que su 
sefior monteyuma, les A Enbiado a mandar que no la diesen 
ni queria que pasasemos de alii adelante y estando En estas 
platicas vinieron tres yndios de los de §enpoal, nros amigos 
',y secretamente dixeron A cortes que an hallado, junto a don- 
de Estavamos aposentados hechos hoyos En las calles, En- 
cubiertos con madera E tierra Engima que si no miran mu- 
cho En ello, no se podria ver, E que quitaron la tierra de 
Engima de vn hoyo E estava Ueno de Estacas muy agudas, 
para matar los cavallos, si corriesen, E que las agoteas, que las 
, tienen Uenas de piedras, E manparos de adobes, y que gier- 
•tamente no estavan de buen arte, porque tanbien hallaron 
albarradas de maderos gruesos En otra calle y En aquel ys- 
- tante vinieron ocho yndios tascaltecas, de los que dexamos 
• En el canpo, que no Entraron En cholula, y dixeron a cor- 
tes, mira malinche questa gibdad Esta de mala manera, porq 
. sabemos questa noche an sacrificado a su ydolo, ques El de 
la guerra, siete personas y los jinco dellos, son nifios porque 
les de vitoria contra vosotros, E tanbien avemos visto que 
sacan todo El fardaje, E mugeres, E nifios. desque aquello 
oyo cortes luego les despacho para que fuesen a sus capita- 



nee los tascaltecas, questuviesen muy aparejados, si les En- 
biasemos a llamar, E torno a hablar al ca§ique y papas y 
prin§ipales de cholula que no tuviesen miedo, ni anduvie- 
sen alterados y que mirasen la obidiengia que dieron, que 
no la quebrantasen que les castigaria por Ello, que ya les a 
dicho, que nos queremos yr por la mafiana, que A men ester ^ 
dos mill honbres de guerra de aquella ^ibdad, que vayan 
con nosotros Como nos an dado los de tascala, porque En 
los caminos los abra menester, e dixeronle que si darian, E 
demandaron ligengia para yrse luego, a los aper^ebir E muy 
contentos se fueron porque creyeron que con los guereros 
que nos avian de dar y con las capitanias de monteguma 
questavan En los arcabuesos y barrancas que alii de muer- 
tos o presos, no podriamos Escapar, por cavsa que no po- 
drian correr los cavallos y por §iertos manparos y albarradas, 
que dieron luego por aviso a los questavan en guarni§ion q 
hiziesen, a manera de callejon q no pudiesemos pasar y les 
avisaron que otro dia aviamos de partir, E questuviesen muy 
a punto todos porque Ellos nos darian'^ dos mill honbres de 
guerra, E como fuesemos descuydados, que alii harian su 
presa los vnos y los otros, e nos podian atar E q esto que lo 
tuviesen por gierto, porque ya avian hecho sacrifi§ios a sus 
ydolos de la guerra, y les an prometido la vitoria, y dexe- 
mos de hablar En ello, que pensavan que seria §ierto E bol- 
vamos a nro capitan, que quiso saber muy por estenso to- 
do El con§ierto, y lo que pasava, y dixo a dona marina, que 
llevase mas chalchiuys a los dos papas que avia hablado 
primero, pues no tenian miedo, E con palabras amorosas les 
dixese que los queria tornar a hablar malinche, E que los tru- 
xese consigo, y la dona marina fue y les hablo de tal manera 
que lo sabia muy bien hazer, y con dadivas vinieron luego con 
ella, y cortes les dixo, q dixesen la verdad de lo que supie- J 
sen pues heran sa§erdotes de ydolos, E pringipales, que no 
avian de mentir, E que lo que le dixesen que no seria des- 



1 Teetado: **tre8 o quatro.' 

2 Testado: '*quatro/' 



244 

cubierto por via ninguna, pues q otro dia nos aviamos de 
partir, E queries daria mucha rropa, E dixeron q la yerdad 
Es, que su sefior monte§uma supo que yvamos aquella ^ib- 
dad, E que cada dia Estava En muchos acuerdos, E que no 
determinava bien la cosa, E que vnas vezes les Enbiava a 
mandar, que si alia fuesemos que nos hiziezen mucha hon- 
rra E nos Encaminasen a su §ibdad, E otras vezes les En- 
biava a dezir, que ya no hera su voluntad que fuesemos a 
mexico, E que agora nuevamente le an aconsejado su tesca- 
tepuca, E su ychilobos, En quien Ellos tienen gran debo^ion, 
que alii En cholula nos matasen o llevasen atados a mexi- 
co, E que avia Enbiado el dia antes veynte mill honbres de 
guerra, y q la mitad, Estan ya aqui dentro, desta gibdad, E 
la otra mitad, Estan §erca de aqui, Entre vnas quebradas, 
E que ya tienen aviso, como aveys de yr mafiana, y de las 
albarradas q les mandaron hazer, y de los dos mill guerre- 
ros, que os avemos de dar, E como tenian ya hecho congiertos 
que avian de quedar veynte de^osotros, para sacrificar a los 
ydolos de cholula Cortes les mando dar mantas muy labra- 
das y les rrogo que no lo dixesen, porq si lo descubrian que 
a la buelta, que boluiesemos de mexico los matarian, E que se 
querian yr muy de mafiana, E que hiziesen venir todos los 
cagiques para hablalles, como dicho les tiene y luego aque- 
lla noche tomo consejo Cortes de lo q aviamos de hazer por- 
que tenia muy Estremados varones y de buenos consejos, y 
como En tales casos suelen acaesjer, vrios dezian que seria 
bien torger El camino, E yrnos por guaxogingo, otros dezian 
que procurasemos aver paz por cualquier via que pudiese- 
mos, y que nos boluiesemos a tascala, otros dimos pareger q 
si aquellas traygiones dexavamos pasar sin castigo, que En 
qualquiera parte nos tratarian otras peores, y pues questa- 
vamos alii En aquel pueblo, E avia hartos bastimentos, les 
diesemos guerra, porq mas la sentirian En sus casas que no 
En el canpo, y que luego apergibiesemos a los tascaltecas, 
que se hallasen En ello, y a todos paresgio bien este postrer 
acuerdo, y fue desta manera que ya que les avia dicho cortes 
que nos aviamos de partir para otro dia, que hiziesemos que 



J 



246 

liavamos nro hato, que Era harto poco, y que En vnofi gran- 
dee patios, que avia donde poeavamos Estavan con alias 9er- 
cas, que diezemos En los yndios de guerra, pues aquello he- 
ra su mere^ido y que con los Enbaxadores de monteguma 
disimulasemos y les dixesemos que los malos cholutecas an 
querido hazer vna traygion y hechar la culpa della a su se- 
fior monte9uma, E a ellos mismoe como sus Enbaxadores, lo 
qual no creymos que tal mandase hazer, y que les rrogava- 
mos que se Estuviesen En el aposento E no tuviesen mas 
platica con los de aquella ^ibdad porque no nos den que 
pensar que andan juntam*? con Ellos En las tray5iones y 
pa q se vayan con nosotros a mexico por guias, y rrespon- 
dieron que Ellos ni su sefior monte^uma, no saben cosa nin- 
guna de lo que les dizen, E avnque no quisieron les pusimos 
guardas porque no se fuesen sin Ii9en9ia, y porque no supie- 
se monte9uma, que nosotros sabiamos que El hera quien lo 
avia mandado hazer, E aqlla noche Estuvimos muy aper- 
^ebidos y armados, y los cavallos Ensillados y Enfrenados, 
con grandes velas y rrondas que Esto sienpre lo teniamos de 
costunbre porque tuvimos por gierto que todas las capitanias 
asi de mexicanos como de cholutecas, aquella noche avian 
de dar sobre nosotros, y vna yndia vieja muger de vn caci- 
que, como sabia El confierto y trama que tenian ordenado, 
vino secretamente a dofia marina nra lengua, como la via 
moga y de buen pare^er y rrica, le dixo y aconsejo, que se 
fuese con Ella a su casa, si queria Escapar la vida, porq yier- 
tamente aquella noche v otro dia, nos avian ^de matar a to- 
dos, porque ya Estava asi mandado y congertado por El gran 
monteguma, para que Entre los de aquella (ibdad y los me- 
xicanos, se juntasen, y no quedasen ninguno de nosotros a 
vida, o nos llevasen atados a mexico, y que porq sabe esto, 
y por manzilla que tenia de la dofia marina se lo venia a de- 
zir y que tomase todo su hato y se fuese con ella a su casa, 
y que alii la casaria con su hijo, hermano de otro mogo que 
traya la vieja que la Aconpafiava E como lo Entendio la 
dofia marina, y En todo hera muy avisada, la dixo,^o madre 
que mucho tengo que agrade^eros, Eso que me dezis yo me 



t 



fuera agora con vos, sino que no tengo aqui, de quien me fiar 
para llevar mis mantas y joy as do oro ques mucho por vra 
vida madre que aguardeys vn poco, vos y vro hijo, y Esta 
noche nos yremos que agora ya veys, questos tevles, Estan 
^ vjelando, y sentirnos an, y la vieja creyo lo que le dezia, y 
quedose Con Ella platicando, y le pregunto que de que ma- 
.nera nos avian de matar E como E quando E a donde se 
: hizo El con^ierto, y la vieja se lo dixo, ni mas ni menos, que 
lo avian dicho los dos papas, y rrespondio la dofia marina, 
pues como siendo tan secrete Ese nego§io lo alcan§astes vos 
a saber, dixo q su marido se lo avia dho, ques capitan de 
vna pargialidad de aquella ^ibdad, y como tal capitan Esta 
agora. con la gente de guerra, que tiene a cargo, dando orden 
para que se junten En las barracas con los esquadrones del 
gran monte§uima, y que creE questaran juntos esperando, 
para qup-ndo fuesemoB, y que alii nos matarian y questo del 
congierto, que lo sabe tres dias avia, porque de mexico En- 
biaron a su marido vh atanbor dorado E a otros tres capita- 
nes tanbi^n les Enbio rricas mantas y joy as de oro, porque 
nos Uevasen atados a su senor monte9uma, y la dofia mari- 
^ na, como lo oyo, disimulo con la vieja, y dixo, o quanto me 
huelgo En saber que vro hijo. Con quien me quereis casar, 
• Es persona pringipal ^lucho hemos Estado hablando, no que- 
rria que nos sintiesen, por Eso madre, aguardad aqui, Co- 
men5*re a. traer mi hazienda, porque no la podre sacar todo 
junto, E vos y vro hijp, mi hermano, lo guardareys, y luego 
/ nos podremos yr, y la vieja todo se lo creya, y sentose de rre- 
poso la bieja y su hijo, y la dofia marina Entra de presto 
donde Estava El capitan y le dize todo lo que paso con la 
yndia, la qual luego la mando traer antel, y la torno a pre- 
guntar sobre las trayyiones y con§iertos, y le dixo ni mas ni 
menos que los papas, y la pusieron guardas por que no se 
fuese, y desque amanesyio, que cosa hera ver la priesa que 
trayan los cagiqs y papas Con los yndios de guerra con mu- 
chas rrisadas y muy contentos como si ya nos tuvieran me- 
tidos En el garlito E rredes y truxeron mas yndios de guerra 
que les demandamos, que no cupieron En los patios por muy 



i 



247 

grandes que son, que avn todavia estan sin deshazer por me- 
moria de lo pasado, E por bien de mafiana, que vinieron los 
ohulutecas, con la gente de guerra, ya todos nosotros estava- 
mos muy a punto para lo que se avia de hazer, y los solda- 
dos despada y rxodela, puestos a la puerta del gran patio, 
para no dexar salir ningun yndio de los questaran con ar- 
mas, y nto capitan tanbien estava a cavallo, aconpafiado 
de muchos Boldados para su guarda, y desque vio que tan de 
mafiana avian venido los caciques y papas, y gente de gue- 
rra dixo que voluntad tienen Estos traydores de vwnos En- 
tre las barrancas para se hartar de nras carnes mejor lo hara 
nro aenor, y pregunto por los dos papas que avian descubier- 
to El secreto, y le dixeron questavan a la puerta del patio, 
con otros ca9iques, que querian Entrar y mando Cortes agui- 
lar nra lengua que les dixesen, que se fuesen a sus casas,'E 
que agora no tenian neyesidad dellos y esto fue por cavsa, que 
pues nos hizieron buena obra no rre^ibiesen mal por ella por- 
que no los matasemos, E come cortea estava A cavallo, e do- 
fia marina Junto a el, comengo a dezir a los ca^iqs que sin 
hazelles Enojo ninguno, a que cavsa nos querian matar la 
noche pasada, E que si les hemos hecho, o dho, cosa para 
que nos tratasen aquellas tray^iones mas de amonestalles las 
cosaa que a todos los mas pueblos por donde hemos venido 
les dezimos que no sean malos ni sacrifiquen bonbres, ni 
adoren bus ydolos ni coman las carnes de sus proximos que 
no sean someticos, y que tengan buena manera En su bi- 
vir y dezirles las cosas tocantes a nra santa fe, y esto sin 
apremialles En cosa ninguna, E a que fin tienen agora nue- 
vamente: aparejadas muehas varas largas y rresias con colle- 
ras y muchos cordeles En vna casa junto al gran Cu, E por 
que an hecho de tres dias aca albarradas En las calles e oyos 
y pertrechos En las agoteas, y por que an sacado de su gib- 
dad sus hijos E mugeres E hazienda E que bien se a pares- 
gido su mala voluntad y las traygiones que no las pudieron 
Encubrir q avn de comer no nos davan, que por burlar trayan 
agua y lena, y dezian que no avia mayz, E que bien sabe, 
que tienen gerca de alii en vnas barrancas, muehas capitanias 



248 

de guerreros, eeperandonos, creyendo que aviamos de yr por 
aquel camino a mx^ para hazer la traygion que tienen acor- 
dada, con otra mucha gente de guerra, questa noche se a jun- 
tado con ellos. / que pues como En pago de que venimos a 
tenerlos por hermanos y dezilles lo que dios nro sefior y el 
rrey manda nos querian matar E comer nras carnes que ya 
tenian aparejadas las ollas, con sal E agi E tomates que si 
esto querian hazer que fuera mejor que nos dieran guerra, 
Como esforgados y buenos guerreros en los canpos, como hi- 
zieron sus vezinos los tascaltecas y que sabe por muy gierto, 
que tenian congertado q En aquella gibdad, y avn prometi- 
do A su ydolo, abogado de la guerra, que le avian de sacri- 
ficar veynte de nosotros delante del ydolo y tres noches an- 
tes, ya pasadas, que le sacrificaron siete yndios, porque lea 
diese vitoria, lo qual les prometio, E como Es malo y falso, 
no tiene ni tuvo poder contra nosotros y que todas Estas 
maldades y tray gi ones que an tratado E puesto por la obra, 
a de caer sobre Ellos. y esta rrazon se lo dezia dofia marina 
y se lo dava muy bien a Entender y desque lo oyeron los 
papas, y cagiques, y capitanes, dixeron que asi Es verdad lo 
que les dize y que dello no tienen culpa, porque los Enba- 
jadores de monteguma lo ordenaron por mandado de su se- 
fior. Entonges les dixo cortes que tales traygiones como aque- 
Has, que mandan las leyes rreales que no queden sin castigo, 
E que por su delito, q an de morir. E luego mando soltar 
vna escopeta, que hera la sefial que teniamos apergebida pa- 
ra Aquel Efeto, y se les dio vna mano, que se les acordara 
para sienpre, porq matamos muchos dellos ^ que no les apro- 
vecho las promesas de sus falsos ydolos, y no tardaron dos 
oras, quando Uegaron alii nros amigos los tascaltecas que de- 
xamos En el canpo, como ya he dho otra vez, y pelean muy 
fuertemente En las calles, donde los chulultecas tenian otras 
capitanito, defendiendolas, porque no les Entrasemos, y de 
presto fueron desbaratadas, y van por la gibdad rrobando y 
cativando, que no los podiamos detener y otro dia vinieron 

1 Testado: "y otroe se quemaron.'* 



249 

oti*as capitanias de las poblazones de tascala, y les hazen gran- 
des danos e porquestavan muy mal con los de cholula y des- 
que aquello vimos, ansi cortes y los demas capitanes y sol- 
dados por manzilla que huvimos dellos detuvimos a los 
tascaltecas, que no hiziesen mas mal, y cortes mando a xpoual 
de oli, que le truxese todos los capitanes de tascala para les 
hablar y no tardaron de venir, y les mando que rrecogiesen 
toda 8u gente, y que se Estuviesen En el canpo, y ansi lo hi- 
zieron, que no quedaron con nosotros, sino los de ^enpoal, y 
En aqueste ynstante vinieron §iertos caciques y papas chu- 
lultecas que heran de otros barrios, que no se hallaron En 
las tray^iones segund EUos dezian que como es gran 5ibdad 
hera vando y pargialidad por si, y rrogaron a cortes y a to- 
dos nosotros, que perdonasemos El enojo de las traygiones 
que nos tenian ordenado, pues los traydores avian pagado 
Con las vidas y luego vinieron los dos papas amigos nros, que 
nos descubrieron El secreto, y la vieja muger del capitan 
que queria ser suegra de dona marina, como ya he dho otra 
vez, y todos rrogaron a cortes fuesen perdonados y cortes 
quando se lo dezian, mostro tener gran Enojo y mando 11a- 
mar a los Enbajadores de raonteguma questavan detenydos 
en nra conpallia, y dixo que puesto que toda aquella §ibdad 
mere§ia ser asolada que teniendo rrespeto a su senor monte- 
5uma, Cuyos vasallos son, los perdona, E que de ay En ade- 
lante que sean buenos y no les acontezca otra como la pasa- 
da que moriran por ello. E luego mando Uamar los cagiques 
de tascala questavan En el canpo, E les dixo que boluiesen 
los honbres y mugeres que avian cavtivado, que bastavan los 
males que avian hecho, E puesto que se les hazia de mal devol- 
vellos E dezian, que de muchos mas danos heran mere§edo- 
res por las tray§iones que sienpre de aquella 5ibdad an rres- 
f^ebido, y que por mandallo cortes boluieron muchas personas 
mas Ellos quedaron desta vez rricos, ansi de oro, E mantas, 
E algodon, E sal, E esclavos, y demas desto, cortes los hizo 
amigos con los de cholula, que a lo que yo despues vi E en- 
tendi, jamas quebraron las amistades. E mas les mando a 
todos los papas E ca§iques cholotecas que poblazen su §ibdad 

Bemal Diac del Ca8tillo.-l». 



250 

E que hiziesen tianguez y mercados, y que no oviesen temor 
que no se lee hazia Enojo ninguno, rrespondieron que den- 
tro En §inco dias harian poblar toda la yibdad, porque En 
aquella sazon todos los mas vezinos estavan rremotados, E 
dixeron que tenian nes^esidad, que cortes lea nonbrase caci- 
que, porque El que solia mandar que fue vno de los que mu- 
rieron En el patio* E luego pregunto que a qulen le venia El 
ca§icazgo, E dixeron que a vn su hermano, El qual luego le 
senalo por governador hasta que otra cosa les fuese manda- 
do, y demas desto, desque vio la §ibdad poblada, y estavan 
seguros En sus mercados, mando que se juntasen los papas, 
E capitanes, con los demas prin§ipales de aquella ^ibdad, y 
se les dio a Entender muy claramente todas las cosas tocan- 
tes A nra santa fee, E que dexasen de adorar ydolos, y no 
sacrificasen ni comiesen Came humana, ni se rrobasen vnos 
a otros ni husasen las torpedades que solian vsar y que mi- 
rasen que sus ydolos los traen Engafiados E que son malos 
y no dizen verdad, E que tuviesen memoria, que §inco dias 
avia, las mentiras, q les prometio que les daria vitoria, quan- 
do le sacrificaron las siete personas, E como todo quanto di- 
zen a los papas E a ellos, Es todo maldad, E que les rrogava, 
que luego les derrocasen, E hiziesen peda§os, y si ellos no 
querian que nosotros los quitariamos, E que hiziesen Enca- 
lar vno como vmilladero para donde pusi [6se] mos vnacruz. lo 
de la cruz luego lo hizieron y rrespondieron, que quitarian 
los ydolos, y puesto que se lo mando muchas vezes q los qui- 
tasen, lo dilatavan, y Entonges dixo El padre de la md a 
cortes, que hera por demas, a los prin9ipios, quitalles sus 
ydolos, hasta que vayan Entendiendo mas las cosas, y ver 
En que parava nra Entrada En mx*!P y el tienpo nos diria 
lo que aviamos de hazer, que al presente bastava las amo- 
nesta§iones que se les ha hecho y ponelles la cruz. dexare 
de hablar desto E dire como aquella §ibdad, Esta asentada 
En vn llano y En parte E sytio donde estan muchas pobla- 
zones §ercanas, ques tepeaca, tascala, chalco, tecamachalco, 
guaxo§ingo, E otros muchos pueblos, que por ser tantos, aqui 
no los nonbro, y es tierra de mucho mayz, E otras legunbres 



J 



^1 

E de mucho axi, y toda Uena de magueyales, ques donde 
hazen El vino, hazen En ella muy buena lo§a, de barro Co- 
lorado y prieto, E bianco de diversas pinturas E se baste^e 
della mexico, y todas las provinQias comarcanas digamos 
agora como en Cast* de talavera, o plasen§ia. tenia aquella 
gibdad, En aquel tienpo tantas torres muy altas, que heran 
Cues, E adoratorios, donde Estavan sus ydolos, Especial El 
Cu mayor hera de mas altor quel de mx^ puesto que hera 
muy suntoso E alto El Cu mexicano, y tenia otros patios pa 
servi§io de los Cues, segun Entendimos avia alii vn ydolo 
muy grande, El nombre del no me acuerdo, mas Entre Ellos, 
se tenia gran devotion, y venian de muchas partes a le sa- 
crificar, E a tener Como a manera de novenas y le presenta- 
van de las haziendas que tenian. Acuerdome quando En 
aquella §ibdad Entramos, que desque vimos tan altas torres, 
y blanquear, nos pare5io al propio valladoli. dexemos de 
hablar desta §ibdad, y todo lo acaesgido En ella, y digamos 
como los esquadrones que avia Enbiado El gran monte§uma, 
questavan ya puestos entre los arcabue90s, questan cabe cho- 
lula, y tenian hechos manparos E callejones para que no pu- 
diesen correr los cavallos, como lo tenian congertado, como 
ya otra vez lo he dho, desque supieron lo acaes§ido se buel- 
ven mas que de paso para mex*^ y dan rrelagion a su mon- 
teguma, segun y de la manera que todo paso, y por presto 
que fueron ya tenia la nueva, de dos prin§ipales que con 
nosotros estavan, que fuero en posta, y supimos muy de §ier- 
to que quando lo supo monteguma, que sintio gran dolor y 
Enojo, E que luego sacrifico §iertos yndios a su ydolo vichi- 
lobos, que le tenian por dios de la guerra, porq le dixese En 
lo que avia de parar nra yda a mexico, o si nos dexaria Entrar 
En su §ibdad, y avn supimos questuvo Engerrado En sus 
devogiones y sacrifigios dos dias, juntamente con diez pa- 
pas, los mas pringipales, y que ovo rrespuesta de aquellos 
ydolos y fue, que le aconsexaron que nos Enbiase men- 
sageros, a desculpar de lo de cholula y que con muestras 
de paz, nos dexe Entrar En mex~ y questando dentro, con 
quitarnos la comida E agua, o algarnos cualquiera de las 



2b2 

puentes, nos matarian y que En vn dia, si nos dava gue- 
rra, no quedaria ninguno de nosotros a vida y que alii 

• podria hazer sua sacrifi§ios ansi al vichilobos, que le dio 

• esta rrespuesta, como a tescatepuca, que tenia por dios del 
ynfierno, E ternian hartazgas de nros muslos y piernas y bra- 
zes, y las tripas y El cuerpo, y todo lo demas, hartarian las 
culebras, E sierpes y tigres que tenian En vnas casas de ma- 
dera, como adelante dire, En su tienpo y lugar/. dexemos 
de hablar de lo que monteguma sintio, y digamoe como esta 
cosa e castigo de cholula, fue sabido En todas las provingias 
de la nueva espafia, si de antes teniamos fama de esforgados, 
y avian sabido de las guerras de potonchan y tavasco, y de 
§ingapa9inga, y lo de tascala, y nos llamavan tevles, que Es 
nonbre como sus dioses, o cosas malas, desde ay adelante, nos 
tenian por adivinos, y dezian que no se nos podria Encubrir 
cosa ninguna mala, que contra nosotros tratasen, que no lo 
supiesemos, y a esta cavsa nos mostravan buena voluntad./ 
ya creo, questaran hartos los curiosos letores de oyr esta rre- 
la9ion de cholula, ya quisiera avella Acabado de Escrevir y 
no puedo dexar de traer aqui a la memoria, las rredes de ma- 
deros gruesos, que En ella hallamos q Estavan Uenas de yn- 
dios y muchachos A §ebo, para sacrificar y comer sus carnes, 
las quales rredes quebramos y los yndios que En ellas Esta- 
van presos, les mando cortes que se fuesen a donde heran 
naturales, y con amenazas mando a los ca^iqs y capitanes y 
papas de aquella 5ibdad, que no tuviesen mas yndios de aque- 
11a manera ni comiesen carne humana, y ansi lo prometie- 
ron, mas que aprovechava aquellos prometimientos que no 
lo cunplian. pasemos ya adelante y digamos que aquestas 
fueron las grandes crueldades, que Escrive, y nunca acaba 
de dezir el obispo de chiapa, fray bartolome de las casas, por- 
que afirma que sin cavsa ninguna, sino por nro pasatienpo, 

]y porque se nos antojo, se hizo aquel castigo, y avn dizelo 

. de arte. En su libro a quien no lo vio ni lo sabe, q les hara 

creer ques ansi, aquello E otras crueldades que Escrive, sien- 

do todo al rreves,^ e no paso como lo escrive miren los rre- 

1 Testado en el original: '*perdoneme su senoria que lo diga tan daro." 



J 



2^ 

ligiosos de la orden de sefior santo domingo lo que le en el 
libro En lo que a escrito y hallaran ser muy contrario lo vno 
de lo otro, y tanbien quiero dezir, que vnos buenos rreligio- 
sos fran^iscos, que fueron los primeros frayles que su mages- 
tad Enbio a esta nueva espafia despues de ganado mex~ Be- 
gun adelante dire, fueron a cholula para saber E ynquirir 
como y de que manera paso aquel castigo y por que cavsa, E 
la pesquisa que hizieron fue con los mesmos papas E viejos 
de aqlla §ibdad, y despues de bien ynformados dellos mis- 
mos, hallaron ser ni mas ni menos que En esta rrela§ion es- 
crivo, y no como lo dize El obispo, y si por ventura no se 
hiziera aquel castigo nras vidas estavan En mucho peli- 
gro, segun los esquadrones y capitanias q tenian de guerreros 
mexicanos y de cholula, E albarradas E peltrechos, y que 
si alii por nra desdicha nos mataran, Esta nueva espaiia 
no se ganara tan presto, ni se atreviera venir otra armada^ 
E ya que viniera fuera con gran trabajo, porque les defen- 
dieran los puertos y se estuvieran sienpre En sus ydolatrias. 
yo E oydo dezir a vn frayle fran*^ de buena vida que se de- 
zia fray toribio motolinea, que si se pudiera escusar aquel 
castigo, y ellos no dieran cavsa a que se hiziese que mejor fue- 
ra, mas ya que se hizo, que fue bueno, para que todos Iqs yn- 
dios de las provin9ias de la nueva espafia, viesen y conos§ie- 
sen, que aquellos ydolos, y todos los demas, son malos y 
mentirosos y que viendo lo que les avia prometido salio al 
rreves y que perdieron la devotion que antes tenian con 
ellos, y que desde alii En adelante no les sacrificavan, ni ve- 
nian como En rromeria de otras partes como solian y desde 
Enton9es no curaron mas del y le quitaron del alto Cu don- 
de Estava. o le Escondieron, o quebraron, que no pares9io 
mas, y En su lugar avian puesto otro ydolo. dexemoslo ya, 
y dire lo que mas adelante hizimos — 



2S4 



CAPITULO LXXXIIII de ^iertas platicas, 
E mensajeros que Enbiamos al gran mon- 
teguma. 




OMO avian ya pasado catorze dias, questavamos En 
cholula, y no teniamos mas en que Entender, y 
vimos q qdaba aquella §ibdad muy poblada y ha- 
zian mercados, E aviamos hecho amistades Entre Ellos, y los 
de tascala, E les teniamos puesto vna cruz, E amonestado 
las cosas tocantes a nra santa fee, y biamos quel gran mon- 
te5uma Enbiava a nro rreal Espias Encubiertamente, a sa- 
ber E ynquirir, que hera nra voluntad, y^ si aviamos de pa- 
sar adelante para yr a su §ibdad, porque todo lo alcan5ava a 
saber muy Enteramente por dos Enbaxadores, questavan En 
nra conpafiia, acordo nro capitan de Entrar En consejo con 
ciertos capitanes, E algunos soldados, q sabia q le tenia bue- 
na voluntad, porque demas de ser muy esfor5ados, heran de 
buen consejo, porque ninguna cosa hazia sin primero tomar 
sobrello nro pare^er, y fue acordado que blanda y amorosa- 
mente, Enbiasemos a dezir al gran monte§uma, que para cun- 
plir A lo que nro rrey E sefior nos Enbio a estas partes, E 
Emos pasado muchas mares, E rremotas tierras, solamente 
para le ver, E dezille cosas que le seran muy provechosas, 
desque las aya Entendido, que viniendo que veniamos cami- 
no de su §ibdad, porque sus Enbajadores nos Encaminaron ' 
por chulula, que dixeron que heran sus vasallos, E que dos 
dias, los primeros que En ella Entramos, nos rres§ibieron 
muy bien, E para otro dia tenian ordenada vna traygion con 
pensamiento de nos matar y porque somos honbres, que te- 
nemos tal calidad, que no se nos puede Encubrir cosa de tra- 
to, ni tratayion, ni maldad, que contra nosotros quieran ha- 



] 



265 

zer que luego no lo sabemos, E que por esta cavsa castigamos 
algunos que querian ponerlo por obra, E que porque supo, 
que heran sus subjetos, teniendo rrespeto a su persona, E a 
nra gran amistad, dexo de asolar y matar todos los que fueron 
En pensar En la tray §i on, y lo peor de todo es, que dixeron los 
papas, E ca§iques, que por consejo E mandado del y de sus 
JEnbajadores, lo querian hazer, lo qual nunca creymos, que 
tan gran sefior, como el es, tal mandase espe5ialmente avien- 
dose dado por nro amigo, y tenemos colegido de su persona, 
que ya que tan mal pensamiento sus ydolos le pusieron de 

• damos guerra, que seria En el canpo mas En tanto teniamos 
que pelease En canpo, que En poblado, que de dia que de 
noche, porque les matariamos a quien tal pensare hazer, mas 
como le tiene por gran amigo, E le desea ver y hablar, luego 
nos partimos para su §ibdad A dalle quenta muy por Ente- 
ro de lo que El rrey nro sefior nos mando. E como El mon- 
te§uma, oyo Esta Enbajada, y Entendio que por lo de cholu- 
la, no le poniamos toda la culpa, oymos dezir, que torno a 
Entrar con sus papas En ayunos E sacrifigios, q hizieron A 
sus ydolos para que se tornase a rretificar que si nos dexaria 
Entrar En su gibdad o no, y si se lo tornava a mandar como 
le avia dho otra vez, y la rrespuesta que les torno a dar, fue 
como la primera, y que de hecho nos dexe Entrar y que den- 
tro nos mataria A su voluntad, y mas le aconsejaron sus ca- 
pitanes E papas que si^ponia Estorvo En la Entrada, que le 

. hariamos guerra, En los pueblos sus subjetos, teniendo como 

• teniamos por amigos a los tascaltecas, y todos los totonaques 
. de la sierra, E a otros pueblos, que abian tomado nra amis- 
- tad, y por escusar Estos males que mejor y mas sano consejo, 

Es el que les a dado su vichilobos./dexemos de mas dezir de 
lo que monte^uma tenia acordado, E dire lo que sobfe ello 
hizo, E como acordamos de yr camino de mexico, y estando 
de partida, llegaron mensajeros de monte§uma, con vn pre- 
sente, y lo que Enbio a dezir — 



CAPITULO LXXXV Como El gran monte- 
Quma Enbio vn presente de oro, y lo que 
Enbio a dezir y como acordamos de yr ca- 
mino de mexico, y lo que mas Acaes^io— 
sobre Ell( 



como El gran monte§uma ovo tornado otra bez Consejo Con 
8U vichilobos, E papas y capitanes y todos le aconsejaron, 
que nos dexe Entrar En su gibdad. E que alii nos mataria A 
su saluo, y despues que oyo las palabras, que le Enbiamos 
a dezir A§erca de nra amistad E tanbien otras rrazones bra- 
vosas, como somos honbres que no se nos Encubre traygion, 
que contra nosotros se trate, que no le sepamos, y que En lo 
de la guerra, que Eso se nos da, que sea En el caripo, o En 
poblado, que de noche o de dia o de otra qulqr mafia, E co- 
mo avia Entendido las guerras de tascala E avia sabido lo 
de potonchan E tabasco, E gingapaginga, E agora lo de cho- 
. lula, Estava asonbrado y avn temeroso y despues de muchos 
• acuerdos que tuvo, Enbio seys pringipales con un presente 
de oro y joy as de mucha diversidad de hechuras que baldria 
a lo que juzgavan sobre dos mill pesos y tanbien Enbio gier- 
tas cargas de mantas muy rricas, e de primas lavores. E quan- 
do aquellos pringipales llegaron ante cortes con el presente, 
besaron la tierra, con la mano, E con gran acato, Como entre 
EUos se husa, dixeron, malinche, nro senor El gran monte- 
guma, te Enbia este presente, y dize que le rresgibas con el 
amor grande que te tiene, E a todos vros hermanos, E que 
le pesa del Enojo que le dieron los de cholula, E que quisie- 
ra que los castigara mas, En sus personas, porque son malos E 
mentirosos, que las maldades que Ellos querian hazer le he- 
chavan a el la culpa, E a sus Enbajadores, E que tuviesemos 
por muy gierto que era nro amigo, E que vamos a su gib- 
dad quando quisieremos, que puesto quel nos quiera hazer 



257 

mucha honrra, como a personas tan Esforgados, y mensageros 
de tan alto rrey, como dezis que Es, e porq no tiene q nos 
dar de comer, que la ^ibdad se lleva todo El bastimento de 
acarreto, por estar En la laguna poblados, no lo podra hazer 
tan cunplidamente, mas quel procurara de azernos toda la 
mas honrra que pudiere y que por los pueblos por donde 
aviamos de pasar quel A mandado que nos den lo que ovie- 
semos menester. E dixo otros muchos cunplimientos de pa- 
labra, y como cortes lo Entendio, por nras lenguas rresgi- 
bio Aquel presente, con muestras de amor, E abrago a los 
mensageros, y les mando dar giertos diamantes torjidos, E 
todos nros capitanes y soldados nos alegramos Con tan bue- 
nas nuevas. En mandarnos que vamos A su gibdad, porque 
de dia en dia, lo Estavamos deseando todos los mas soldados. 
Especial, los que no dexavamos En la ysla de cuba bienes 
ningunos, E aviamos venido dos vezes A descubrir primero 
que cortes. dexemos Esto y digamos Como El capitan lea dio 
buena rrespuesta, E muy amorosa, E mando que se queda- 
sen tres mensageros, de los que vinieron con El presente pa- 
ra que fuesen con nosotros por guias, y los otros tres bolvie- 
ron con la rrespuesta a su sefior y le avisan que ya y vamos 
camino y quando Aquella nra partida Entendieron los ca- 
ciques may ores de tascala, que se dezian xicotenga El viejo 
E 5iego y mase Escape, los quales E nonbrado otras vezes, 
les peso En el Alma, E Enbiaron a dezir a cortes, que ya le 
avian dho muchas vezes, que mirase lo que hazia E se guar- 
dase de Entrar en tan rrezia gibdad, donde avia tantas fuer- 
gas, E tanta multitud de guerreros, porque vn dia o otro nos 
darian guerra, E temia que no podriamos salir con las vidas, 
E que por la buena voluntad que nos tiene, que Ellos quie- 
ren Enbiar diez mill honbres, con capitanes Esforgados, que 
vayan con nosotros Con bastimento para El camino. cortes 
se lo agradesgio mucho su buena voluntad, y les dixo E que 
no es justo Entrar en mexico con tanta copia de guerreros, 
Espegialmente siendo tan contrarios los vnos de los otros, 
que solamente avia menester mill honbres para llevar los te- 
puzques E fardaje, E para adobar algunos caminos. ya E dho 

Bernia Dl«i del CMtUlo.— 94. 



268 

otra vez, que tepuzques, En estas partes, dizen por los tiros, 
que son de hierro, que llevavamos, y luego despacharon los 
mill yndios muy aper§ebidos, E ya questavamos a punto pa- 
ra caminar vinieron Ante cortes los Ca§iques E todos los mas 
pringipales guerreros que sacamos de yenpoal que andavan 
En nra conpania y nos sirvieron muy bien y lealmente E 
dixeron que se querian bolver a §enpoal E que no pasarian 
de cholula adelante para yr a mexico, porque §ierto tenian 
que si alia y van que avian de morir, Ellos y nosotros, E que 
El gran monteguma les mandaria matar porque heran per- 
sonas muy pringipales de los de ^enpoal, que fueron En quita- 
lle la obidien§ia, E En que no se le diese tributo, E En apri- 
sionar sus rrecavdadores quando ovo la rrebelion yapor mi. 
otra vez Escrita en Esta rrela§ion. E desque cortes los vio 
que Con tanta voluntad le demandavan aquella ligenyia, les 
rrespondio, Con dona marina E aguilar que no oviesen temor 
ninguno que rres§ibirian mal ni daflo, E que pues yvan En 
nra conpania, que quien avia de ser osado a los Enojar, a 
Ellos ni a nosotros, e que les rrogava que mudasen su volun- 
tad, E que se quedasen con nosotros y les prometio que les 
haria rricos, E por mas que se lo rrogo cortes, E dona mari- 
na se lo dezia muy afectuosamente, nunca quisieron quedar 
sino que se querian boluer. E desque aquello vio cortes di- 
xo nunca dios quiera, que nosotros llevemos por fuer§a aques- 
tos yndios, que tan bien nos an servido, y mando traer mu- 
chas cargas de mantas rricas, E se las rrepartio Entre todos, 
E tanbien Enbio al ca§ique gordo, nro amigo, sefior de 5en- 
poal dos cargas de mantas para el, y para su sobrino Cuesco, 
que ansi se llama otro gran cagique, y Escrivio al tenien- 
te joan descalante, que dexavamos por capitan, y hera En 
aquella sazon alguazil mayor, todo lo que nos avia acaesyi- 
do, y como yvamos camino de mexico, E que mirase muy 
bien por todos los vezinos, E se velase, E que sienpre Estu- 
viese de dia, E de noche con gran cuydado, E que acabase 
de hazer la fortaleza, E que a los naturales de aquellos pue- 
blos, que los faboresyiese contra mexicanos, y no se les hizie- 
se agravio por ningun soldado de los que con El esta van, y 



i 



269 



escrita Esta carta, y partidos los de genpoal, comengamos de 
yr nro camino muy aper§ebidos. 



CAPITULO LXXXYI como comen^amos A 
caminar para la (jibdad de mexico y En lo 
q En el camino nos avino, y lo que mon- 
teguma Enbio a dezir — 

ansi como salimos de cholula con gran Conjierto, como lo 
teniamos de costunbre, los corredores de canpo A cavallo, 
descubriendo la tierra, E peones muy sueltos, juntamente 
con ellos para si algund mal paso o Enbarago oviese ayudasen 
los vnos a los otros, E nros tiros muy a punto, E escopeteros, 
E ballesteros E los de a cavallo de tres En tres para que se 
ayudasen, y todos los mas soldados En gran congierto. no se 
yo para que lo traigo tanto a la memoria sino que En las 
cosas de la guerra por fuerga hemos de hazer rrelagion dello, 
para que se vea qual andavamos, la barba sienpre sobre El 
honbro, E ansi caminando llegamos aquel dia, a vnos rran- 
chos, questan En vna como serrezuela, ques poblazon de 
guaxo§ingo, que me pares§e que se dizen los rranchos de ys- 
calpan quatro leguas de cholula, E alii vinieron luego los 
caciques y papas de los pueblos de guaxo§ingo, questava §er- 
ca, E Eran amigos, E confederados de los tascaltecas, y tan- 
bien vinieron otros poblezuelos, questan poblados a las aldas 
del bolcan que confinan con ellos E truxeron bastimento, y 
vn presente de joyas de oro de poca valia, y dixeron a cortes, 
que rres^ibiese aqllo E no mirase a lo poco que era, sino a la 
voluntad Con que se lo davan y le aconsejaron que no fuese 
a mex*^, que hera vna §ibdad muy fuerte y de muchos gue- 
rreros, y que correriamos mucho peligro, E que mirase que 
ya que y vamos, que subido aquel puerto, que avia dos cami- 
nos muy anchos, y quel vno yba a vn pueblo que se dize 
chalco y el otro a tamanalco que hera otro pueblo, y Entran- 



bos subjetos a mex~ y quel vn camino estava muy barrido, 
E linpio para que vamos por el, E que El otro camino le te- 
nian ^iego, E cortados muchoe arboles muy gruesos y gran- 
des pinos porque no puedan yr cavallos, ni pudiesemos pa- 
sar adelante E que abaxado vn poco de la sierra por el 
camino que tenian linpio creyendo que aviamos de yr por 
el tenian cortado vn pedago de la sierra E avia alii manpa- 
ros, E albarradas, E que an Estado En el paso fiertos Es- 
quadrones de mexicanos, para nos matar, E que nos aconse- 
javan que no fuesemos por el questava linpio sino por donde 
Estavan los arboles atravesados, E que Ellos nos daran mu- 
cha gente que lo desEnbara^en E pues que yban Con noso- 
tros los tascaltecas, que todos quitarian los arboles, E que 
aquel camino salia a tamanalco. E cortes les rresgibio El pre- 
sente con mucho amor, y les dixo, que les agrades^ia £1 
aviso, que les dava, E con el Ayuda de dios, que no dexara 
de seguir su camino, E que yra por donde le aconsejavan. E 
luego otro dia bien de manana, comengamos a caminar, E ya 
hera ^erca de medio dia, quando llegamos En lo alto de la 
sierra, donde hallamos los caminos, ni mas ni menos, que 
los de guaxo5ingo dixeron, E alii rreparamos vn poco y avn 
nos dio que pensar En lo de los Esquadrones mexicanos, y 
En la sierra cortada donde Estavan las albarradas, de que 
nos avisaron, E cortes mando llamar a los Enbaxadores del 
gran monte9uma, que y van En nra Conpafiia y les pregun- 
to, que como Estavan aquellos dos caminos de aquella ma- 
nera. El vno muy linpio, E barrido, y El otro lleno de arbo- 
les, cortados nuevamente, y rrespondieron que porque vamos 
por el linpio que sale a vna $ibdad que se dize chalco, don- 
de nos haran buen rresgibimiento, ques de su sefior mon- 
te^uma, y quel otro camino, que le pusieron aquellos ar- 
boles y lo gegaron porque no fuesemos por El, que ay malos 
pasos, E se rrodea algo para yr a mex~, que sale a otro 
pueblo, que no es tan grande como chalco. Entonges di- 
xo cortes, que queria yr por el questava EnbaraQado, E co- 
mengamos a subir la sierra, puestos En gran con^ierto, y 
nros amigos apartando los arboles muy grandes E muy grue- 



261 

806y por donde pasamos con gran trabajo, E hasta oy En dia 
Estan algunos dellos fuera del camino, y subiendo a lo mas 
alto comen^o a nevar, y se quaxo de nieve, la trra E cami- 
namos la sierra abaxo, E fuimos a dormir a vnas caserias, 
que heran como a manera de aposentos, o mesones, donde 
posavan yndios mercaderes, E tuvimos bien de ^enar E con 
gran frio, E pusimos nras velas, E rrondas, y escuchas, y avn 
corredores del canpo, E a otro dia comen9amos a caminar E 
a ora de misas mayores llegamoe a vn pueblo, que ya E dicho 
que se dize tamanalco, E nos rre9ibieron bien, E de comer 
no falto, E como supieron de otros pueblos de nra llegada 
luego vinieron los de chalco, E se juntaron Con los de ta- 
manalco, E chimaloacan E mecameca, E aca^ingo, donde 
Estan las canoas, ques puerto dellos E otros poblezuelos que 
ya no se me acuerda El nonbre dellos, y todos juntos truxe- 
ron vn presente de oro y dos cargas de mantas, E ocho yn- 
dias que baldria El oro sobre ^iento y ^inquenta pesos, E 
dixeron, malinche, rres^ibe estos presentes que te damos y 
tennos de aqui adelante por tus amigos, y cortes lo rre^ibio 
con grande amor y se les ofresgio, que En todo lo que ovie- 
sen menester les ayudaria, y desque los vio juntos dixo al 
padre de la md que les amonestase las cosas tocantes a nra 
santa fe, E dexasen sus ydolos, y se les dixo todo lo que so- 
liamoe dezir En todos los mas pueblos por donde aviamos 
venido, e a todo rrespondieron que bien dicho Estava, E que 
lo verian adelante tanbien se les dio a Entender El gran po- 
der del Enperador nro sefior, E que veniamos a deshazer 
agravios, E rrobos E que para ello nos Enbio a estas partes — 
E como aquello oyeron, todos aquellos pueblos, que dicho 
tango, secretam** que no lo siqiieron los Enbaxadores mexi- 
canos, dan tantas quexas de monteguma, E de sus rrecavda- 
dores, que les rrobavan quanto tenian, y sus mugeres E hi- 
jas si heran hermosas las forsavan delante dellos, y de sus 
maridos, y se las tomavan, E que les hazian trabajar como 
si fueran Esclavos, que les hazian llevar En canoas, E por 
tierra, madera de pinos, E piedra, E lefia, E mayz, E otros 
muchos servifios de senbrar mayzales, y les tomavan sus trras 



262 

para servigio de sus ydolos, E otras muchas quexas, que co- 
mo a ya muchos afios que paso, no me acuerdo. E cortes les 
consolo con palabras amorosas, que se las sabia muy bien de- 
zir con dofia marina, y que agora al presente no puede En- 
tender En hazelles'justigia, E que se 5ufriesen, quel les qui- 
taria aquel dominio, E secretamente les mando que fuesen 
dos prin§ipales, con otros quatro de nros amigos de tascala 
a ver El camino barrido que nos ovieron dicho los de gua- 
xogingo, que no fuesemos por El, para que viesen que alba- 
rradas E manparo tenian, E si estavan alii algunos esqua- 
drones de guerra, y los ca§iques rrespondieron, malinche no 
hay ne§esidad de yllo a ver porque todo Esta agora muy lla- 
no E adereyado E as de saber que abra seys dias, questavan 
a vn mal paso, que tenian cortada la sierra, porq no pudie- 
ses pasar, con mucha gente de guerra del gran monte9uma, 
Emos sabido que su vichilobos, ques El dios que tienen de 
la guerra les aconsejo, que os dexen pasar, E desque Entreys 
En mexico, que alii os mataran por tanto, lo que nos parage 
Es, que os Esteys aqui con nosotros, E os daremos de lo que 
tuvieremos, E no vays a mex*^, que sabemos yierto, que se- 
gun Es fuerte e de muchos gerreros, no os dexaran con las 
vidas, y cortes les dixo, con buen senblante que no tenian 
los mexicanos, ni otras ningunas na§iones, poder de nos ma- 
tar salvo nro sefior dios. En quien crehemos, E que porque 
vean, que al mismo monte§uma, E a todos sus caciques, E 
papas, les vamos a dar a Entender lo q nro dios manda, que 
luego se queria partir, E que le diesen veynte honbres prin- 
gipales que vayan En nra conpania, y que haria mucho por 
Ellos, E les aria just^ desq aya Entrado En mex^, para que 
monte§uma, ni sus rrecavdadores, no les hagan las demasias 
ni fuer§as que an dho, que les hazen, y con alegre rrostro 
todos los de aquellos pueblos, por mi ya nonbrados, dieron 
buenas rrespuestas, y nos truxeron los veynte yndios, E ya 
questavamos para partir, vinieron mensageros del gran mou- 
teguma, y lo que dixeron, dire adelante. 



I 



268 



CAPITULO LXXXVII Como El gran mon- 
tecjuma nos Knbio otros enbaxadores, con 
vn presente de oro, y mantas, y lo que di- 
xeron a cortes y lo q les rrespondio. 

ya questavamos de partida para yr nro camino a mex*^, vi- 
nieron ante cortes quatro pringipales mexicanos, que Enbio 
monteyuma, y truxeron vn presente de oro y mantas, y des- 
pu^8 de hecho su acato, como lo tenian de costunbre dixerbn, 
malinche, Este presente te Enbia nro seiior El gran monte- 
9uma y dize que le pesa mucho, por El trabajo que aveys 
pasado En venir de tan lejos trras a le ver y que ya te a 
Enbiado a dezir otra vez que te dara mucho oro y plata, y 
chalchihuis, En tributo, para vro Enperador, y para vos y los 
demas tevles que traeys, y que no vengas a mexico, e agora 
nuevamente te pide por md, que no parses de aqui adelante, 
sino que te buelvas por donde veniste, ql te promete, de te 
enbiar al puerto mucha cantidad de oro y plata, y rricas pie- 
dras para Ese vro rrey y para ti, te dara quatro cargas de oro, 
y para cada vno de tus hermanos, vna carga, porq yr a mex*^, 
Es Escusada tu Entrada dentro, que todos sus vasallos estan 
puestos En armas para no os dexar Entrar y demas desto, 
que no tenia camino, sino muy angosto, ni bastimentos, que 
comiesemos, y dixo otras muchas rrazones de ynconvinien- 
tes para que no pasasemos de alii, E cortes, con mucho amor 
abra§o a los mensageros, puesto que le peso de la Enbaxada 
y rres§ibio El presente q ya no se me acuerda, que tanto va- 
lia, E a lo que yo vi, y Entendi, jamas dexo de Enbiar mon- 
te9uma oro, poco o mucho, quando Enbiava mensageros co- 
mo otra vez he dho. E boluiendo a nra rrela^jion cortes les 
rrespondio, q se maravillava del senor monte5uma, aviendo- 
se dado por nro amigo, y siendo tan gran sefior tener tantas 
mudan^as, que vnas vezes dize vno y otras Enbia a mandar 



264 

al contrario, y que En quanto a lo que dize, que dara El oro 
para nro sefior El enperador y para nosotros, que se lo tiene 
En md, y por aquello que agora le Enbia que En buenas 
obras se lo pagara, El tienpo andando, y que si le pares^era 
bien questando tan 5erca de su gibdad, sera bueno boluemoe 
del camino, sin hazer aquello que nro senor nos manda, que 
si El sefior montezuma oviese Enbiado sus mensageros y En- 
bajadores, [&] algun gran sefior como El Es, ya que llegaaen 
jerca de su casa, aquellos mensageros que Enbiava se bolvie- 
sen sin le hablar y dezille a lo que y van, desque boluiesen ante 
su presen5ia, con aquel rrecavdo, que mereedes les haria, si- 
no tenelles por cobardes, y de poca calidad, que ansi haria 
nro sefior El enperador con nosotros, y que de vna manera, 
o de otra, que aviamos de Entrar En su 9ibdad, y desde alii 
adelante, que no le Enbie mas Escusas sobre aquel caso por- 
que le a de ver E ablar y dar rrazon de todo, El rrecavdo 
a que hemos venido, y a de ser a su sola persona y desque 
lo aya Entendido, si no le Estuviese bien nra estada En su 
(ibdad, que nos bolueremos por donde venimos E quanto A 
lo que dize que no tiene comida, sino muy poco, E que no 
nos podremos sustentar, q somos honbres, que con poca cosa 
que comemos, nos pasamos E que ya vamos camino de su 
gibdad, que aya por bien nra yda. E luego En despachando 
los mensageros, comen^amos A caminar para mexico y como 
nos avian dho y avisado los de guaxoyingo y los de cbalco, 
que montezuma avia tenido platicas con sus ydolos y papas, 
que si nos dexaria Entrar En mex~, o si nos daria guerra, y 
todos sus papas le rrespondieron, q dezia su huichilobos, que 
nos dexase Entrar q alii nos podra matar, segund dho tengo 
otras vezes, En el capitulo q dello habla, y como somos hon- 
bres, y temiamos la muerte, no dexavamos de pensar En ello, 
y como Aquella tierra Es muy poblada, y vamos sienpre ca- 
mynando muy chicas jornadas, y Encomendandonos ajdios, 
y a su bendita madre nra sefiora y platicando Como y de q 
manera podiamos Entrar, y pusimos En nros coragones, con 
buena Esperanga, que pues nro sefior Jesu, xpo fue servido 
guardarnos de los peligros pasados, q tanbien nos guardaria 



266 

del poder de mex^, y fuymos a dormir a vn pueblo, q se dize 
yztapal, atengo, qsta la mitad de las casajs En el agua, y la 
mitad En tierra firme, donde Esta vna serrezuela y agora 
Esta vna venta, y alii tuvimos bien de yenar dexemos Esto, y 
bolvamoe al gran monteyuma que como llegaron sus men- 
sageros, y oyo la rrespuesta que cortes le Enbio, luego acor- 
do de Enbiar a vn su sobrino q se dezia cacamatzin senor de 
tezCuco, Con muy gran favsto, a dar El bien venido a cortes 
y a todos nosotros, y como sienpre teniamos de costunbre de 
tener velas y corredores del canpo, vino vno de nros corre- 
dores avisar, q venian por El camino, muy gran copia de 
mexicanos de paz, y que al paresger venian de rricas man- 
tas vestidos y Entonyes, quando Esto paso, Era muy de ma- 
fiana, y qriamos Caminar y cortes noa dixo q rreparasemos 
En nras posadas, hasta ver q cosa Era, y En aquel ynstante 
vinieron quatro prinyipales, y hazen a cortes gran rreveren§ia 

• y le dizen q alii §erca viene cacamatzin gran senor de tezcu- 

• CO, sobrino del gran montezuma, y q nos pide por md q aguar- 
. demos hasta q venga, y no tardo mucho, porque luego llego 

con El mayor fausto y grandeza q ningun senor de los mexi- 
canos aviamos visto traer, porq venia En andas muy rricas 
labradas de plumas verdes, y mucha argenteria y otras rri- 
cas pedrerias engastadas en arboledas de oro, que En ellas 
traya hechas de oro muy fino, y trayan las andas A cuestas 
ocho prin§ipales, y todos segun dezian Eran sejQores de pue- 
blos, ya que llegaron gerca del aposento donde estava cortes, 
le ayudaron A salir de las andas, y le barrieron El suelo, y le 
quitavan las pajas por donde avia de pasar y desque llega- 
ron ante nro capitan le hizieron grande acato, y El Cacama- 
gin, le dixo, malinche, aqui venimos, yo y estos senores, a te 
servir, E hazerte dar todo lo que huvieres menester para ti 
y tus conpafieros, y meteros En vras casas, ques nra yibdad 
porque asi nos Es mandado por nro senor el gran montegu- 
ma y dize que le perdones, porque el mismo no viene a lo que 
nosotros venimos, y porquesta mal dispuesto lo dexa y no 
por falta de muy buena voluntad que os tiene. E quando nro 
Capitan, e todos nosotros, vimos tanto aparato y magestad 

B^rnal Dlai del Oitillo.— 35, 



266 

Como trayan aquellos cagiques, espe§ialmente el sobriiio de 
montezuma lo tuvimos por gran cosa, y platicamos entre 
nosotros, que quando aquel Ca§ique traya tanto triunfo que 
haria el gran montezuma y como el Cacamazi, ovo dicho su 
rrazonamiento, Cortes le abrazo, y le hizo muchas quiri^iaa 
a el y a todos los mas pringipales, y dio tres piedras que se 
llaman margaritas, que tienen dentro de si muchas pinturas 
de diversas Colores e a los demas prin5ipales se les dio dia- 
mantes azules, y les dixo que se lo tenia En md E que quan- 
do pagaria al sefior monte9uma las mds que cada dia nos ha- 
ze, y acabada la platica, luego nos partimos, e como avian 
venido aquellos Ca§iqs que dicho tengo, trayan mucha gente 
Consigo, y de otros muchos pueblos, questan En aquella Co- 
marca, que salian a vernos todos los caminos estavan llenos 
dellos,^ y otro dia por la manana Uegamos a la cal^ada an- 
cha y vamos Camino de Estapalapa, y desque vimos tantas 
gibdades y villas pobladas En el agua, y en tierra firme, otras 
grandes poblazones, y aquella Gal^ada tan derecha, y por ni- 
r vel como yva a mex~ nos quedamos admirados y deziamos 
J que paresgia a las cosas de encantamiento que Cuentan En 
el libro de amadis, por las grandes torres, y Cues, y edifigios, 
que tenian dentro En el agua, y todos de Calicanto, y avn 
algunos de nros soldados dezian, que si aquello que vian, si 
hera entre suefios, y no es de maravillar, que yo lo escriva 
aqui desta manera porque ay mucho que ponderar En ello 

1 En el original aparece testado lo siguiente: ''que no podiamos andar, y 
los mismoB caciques dezian a sua vasallos q hiziesen lugar, e que mimen que 
heramoB tevles, que si no hazian lugar noe EnojariamoB Con ellos, y por estaa 
palabras que les dezian, nos de8enbara9aron el camino, e fuimos a dormir a 
otro pueblo, questa poblado en la laguna que me pare^e que se dize mezqui- 
que, que despues se puso nonbre venen9uela, y tenia tantas torres y grandes 
Cues q blanqueavan y el cacique del y prin9ipale8 nos hizieron mucha honrra, 
y dieron a cortes vn presente de oro y mantas rricas, que valdria El oro qua- 
tro9ientos pesos, y nro CJortes les dio muchas grayias por ello. | alii se les decla- 
ro las cosas tocantes a nra santa fee como haziamos en todos los pueblos por 
donde veniamos y segun pares^io, aqueUos de aquel pueblo estavan muy mal 
Ck)n montezuma, de muchos agravios que les avia hecho, y se quexaron del 
y Cortes les dixo que pronto se rremediaria, y que agora llegariamos a mx** 9I 
dios foese servido y entenderia en todo/' 



I 

J 



267 

que no se Como lo cuente, ver Cosas nunca oydas, ni vistad, 
ni avn sofiadas Como viamos, pues desque llegamos ferca 
destapalapa, ver la grandeza de otros Cagiques, que nos sa- 
lieron a rresgebir que fue el sefior de aquel pueblo que se 
dezia Coadlabaca, y el sefior de culuacan, que entranbos eran 
debdos muy gercanos del montezuma, y desque entramos en 
^ aquella §ibdad dystapalapa de la manera de los pala§io8 don- 
de nos aposentaron, de quan grandes y bien labrados heran, 
de canteria muy prima, y la madera de gedros, y de otros 
buenos arboles olorosos, Con grandes patios, E quartos, Co- 
sas muy de ver, y entoldados, Con paramentos de algodon. — 
despues de bien visto todo aquello, fuimos a la huerta E xar- 
din, que fue cosa muy admirable, vello y paseallo, que no 
me hartava de mirar la diversidad de arboles, y los olores 
que cada vno tenia, y andenes llenos de rrosas y flores, y mu- 
chos frutales y rrosales de la trra, y vn estanque de agua du- 
ge y otra cosa, de ver, que podian entrar en el vergel grandes 
Canoas, dedde la laguna, por vna abertura que tenian hecha, 
sin saltar en tierra, e todo muy encalado, y luzido, de mu- 
chas maneras de piedras y pinturas en ellas, que avia har- 
to que ponderar, y de las aves de muchas diversidades y rra- 
leas que entravan En el estanque. digo otra vez, que lo estuve 
mirando, que crey q en el mudo obiese otras trras desCubier- 
tas Como estas, porq en aql tpo no avia peru ny memoria 
del. agora todo esta por el suelo perdido que no ay cosa en 
pie. pasemos adelante y dire, Como truxeron vn presente 
de oro, los ca§iques de aquella gibdad, y los de Cuyuacan, 
que valia sobre dos mill pesos, y cortes le^ dio muchas gra- 
qiBs por ello, y les mostro grande amor, y se les dixo Con 
nras lenguas las Cosas tocantes a nra santa fee, y se les de- 
claro el gran poder de nro sefior el enperador, e porque ovo 
otras muchas platicas, lo dexare de dezir, y dire que en aque- 
lla sazon, Era muy gran pueblo, y questava poblada la mi- 
tad de las Casas en tierra, y la otra mitad en el agua, e agora . 
en esta sazon esta todo seco, y sienbran donde solia ser lagu- 
^na, Esta de otra manera mudado, que si no lo huviera de antes 
►visto, dixera que no era posible que aquello questava Ueno de 



agua, questa aora senbrado de mayzales, dexemoslo aqui y 
dire del solenisimo rre§ibimiento que nos hizo montezuma, 
a cortes, y a todos nosotros En la entrada de la gran ^ibdad 
de mx^ 



CAPITULO LXXXVIII del grande e solene 
rrescjibimiento que nos hizo el gran mon- 
tezuma a cortes y a todos nosotros, en la 
entrada de la gran Qibdadde mex^^ 

luego otro dia de mafiana, partimos destapalapa, muy acon- 
pafiados de aquellos grandes caciques, que atras E dicho, 
yvamos por nra cal§ada adelante lo qual es ancha, de ocho 
pasos, y va tan derecha a la §ibdad de mex*** que me parage 
que no se tor§ia poco ni mucho, e puesto ques Men ancha, 
toda yva llena de aquellas gentes que no cabian, vnos que 
entravan en mexico y otros que salian, y los que nos venian 
a ver, que no nos podiamos rrodear de tantos como binye- 
ron, porquestavan Uenas las torres e Cues y En las canoas 
y de todas partes de la laguna, y no hera cosa de maravillar 
porque janaas avian visto cavallos ni honbres Como nosotros 
y de que vimos cosas tan admirables no sabiamos que nos 
dezir, o si era verdad lo que por delante pare§ia, que por vna 
parte En tierra, avia grandes ^ibdades y En la laguna otras 
muchas, E viamoslo todo lleno de canoas, y en la cal^ada 
muchas puentes de trecho a trecho, y por delante estava la 
gran §ibdad de mexico, y nosotros avn no llegavamos a qua- 
trozientos soldados, y teniamos muy bien en la memoria las 
platicas E abisos que nos dixeron los de guaxo5ingo E tas- 
cala y de tamanalco, y con otros muchos avisos q nos avian 
dado para que nos guardasemos de Entrar En mexico, que 
nos avian de matar, desque dentro nos tuviesen. / miren los 
curiosos letores si Esto quescrivo, si avia bien que ponderar 
En ello, que honbres avido En el vniverso, que tal atrevi- 



j 



miento tuviesen. pasemos adelante, yvamos por nra calgada, 
ya que llegamos donde se aparta otra cal§adilla que yva a 
Cuyuacan, ques otra gibdad, a donde Estavan vnas como to- 
rres, que heran sus adoratorios, vinieron muchos pringipa- 
les y caciques con muy rricas mantas Bobre si, con galania 
de libreas diferen^iadas las de los vnos ca§ique8 de los otros, 
y las cal^adas Uenas dellos, y aquellos grandes cagiques, En- 
biava el gran monte^uma adelante, a rre9ebirnos y ansi Co- 
mo llegavan ante cortes dezian en su lengua que fuesemos 
bien venidos, y en serial de paz, tocavan con la mano En el 
suelo, y besavan la trra con la mesma mano. ansi questuvi- 
mos parados vn buen rrato, y desde alii se adelantaron, el 
Cacamagi, seflor de tezcuco, y el sefior de yztapalapa, y el se- 
nor de tacuba, y el sefior de cuyuacan, a Encontrarse, Con 
el gran monte^uma^ que venia §erca, En rricas andas, acon- 
pafiado de otros grandes sefiores, y cayiques, q tenian vasa- 
Uos, ya que Uegavamos ^rca de mex°^ a donde estavan otras 
torrezillas, se apeo el gran monteguma de las andas, y trayan- 
le de bra§o, aquellos grandes ca§iques, debajo de vn palio, 
muy rriquisimo, a maravilla, y la color de plumas verdes 
Con grandes labores de oro, con mucha argenteria y perlas, 
y piedras chalchivis, que colgavan de vnas como bordaduras 
que ovo mucho que mirar en ello, y el gran montezuma ve- 
nia muy rricamente ataviado, segun su vsan^a y traya cal- 
^ados vnos como cotaras, q ansi se dize lo q se calyan, las 
suelas de oro, y muy pregiada pedreria por engima En ellas, 
e los quatro sefiores, que le trayan de bra§o venian Con rri- 
ca manera de vestidos a su vsan§a, que pares§e ser se los te- 
nian aparejados en el camino para entrar Con su sefior, que 
no trayan los bestidos con los que nos fueron a rres9ebir, E 
venian, sin aquellos quatro sefiores, otros quatro grandes ca- 
yiques, que trayan el palio sobre sus cabe§as, y otros muchos 
.senores, que venian delante del gran montezuma, barriendo 
el suelo por donde avia de pisar y le ponian mantas, porque 
. no pisase la tierra. todos estos sefiores ni por pensamiento le 
• miravan en la cara, sino los ojos bajos, e con mucho acato, 
e^eto aquellos quatro debdos, e sobrinos suyos, que lo lleva- 



270 

van de bra§o. e como cortes vio y entendio e le dixeron que 
venia el gran monteguma, se apeo del cavallo, y desque lie- 
go gerca de monteguma, a vna se hizierou grandes acatos, el 
monteguma le dio el bien venido E nro cortes le rrespondio 
Con dofia marina, quel fuese el muy bien estado, E paresge- 
me quel cortes con la lengua dona marina que yba jimto a 
cortes le dava la mano derecha, y el monteguma no la quiso, 
E se la dio al cortes y dtitonges sacp cortes vn collar que 
traya muy a mano de vnas piedras de vidrio, que ya he di- 
cho que se dizen margaritas, que tienen dentro de si muchas 
labores, e diversidad de colores, y benia Ensartado En vnoe 
cordones de oro con almizque, porque diezen buen olor y se 
le hecho al cuello al gran monteguma y quando se le puso le 
yba abragar y aquellos grandes sefiores que yvan con el 
montezuma detuvieron el brago a cortes que no le abragase 
porq lo tenyan por menospregio y luego cortes con la lengua 
dofia marina, le dixo, que holgava agora su coragon, En aver 
visto vn tan gran prin^pe y que le tenia En gran md la ve- 
nida de su persona a le rresgebir y las mds que le haze a la 
contina. Entonges el monteguma le dixo otras palabras de 
buen comedimiento, E mando a dos de sus sobrinos, de los 
que le trayan de brago, que era el senor de tezcuco y el se- 
fior de cuyuacan, que se fuesen con nosotros, hasta aposen- 
tarnos, y el monteguma con los otros dos sus parientes cued- 
labaca y el senor de tacuba, que le aconpafiavan, se boluio 
a la gibdad, y tanbien se boluieron con el todas aquellas 
grandes conpafias de cagiques y pringipales que le abian be- 
nido aconpafiar e quando se boluian Con su senor, estavamos* 
los mirando como yban todos, los ojos puestos En tierra, sin 
miralle muy arrimados a la pared, E con gran acato le acon- 
pafiavan, E ansi tuvimos lugar nosotros de Entrar por las 
calles de mx~ sin tener tanto enbarago. quien pudiera agora 
dezir la multitud de honbres e mugeres, E muchachos, ques- 
tavan En las calles, E agoteas, y en canoas. En aquellas age- 
quias, que nos salian a mirar era cosa de notar que agora que 
lo estoy escriviendo se me rrepresenta todo delante de mis 
ojos, como si ayer fuera quando esto paso y considerada la 



J 



271 

cosa e gran md q nro sefior Jesuxpo fue servido darnos gratia 
y esfuergo para osar entrar en tal (ibdad, E me aver guarda- 
do de muchos peligros de muerte, como adelante veran, doyle 
muchas gragias per ello, que a tal tienpo me A traydo para 
podello escrevir, E avnque no tan cunplidamente como con- 
benia y se rrequiere, E dexemos palabras, pues las obras son 
buen testigo de lo que digo, en algunas destas ptes, E bolua- 
mos a nra Entrada en mx~ que nos llevaron aposentar a 
vnas grandes casas, donde avia Aposentos, para todos noso- 
tros, que avian sido de su padre del gran monte§uma, que se 
dezia axayaca, a donde en aquellasazon tenia el montezuma 
sua grandes adoratorios de ydolos, e tenia vna rrecamara 
muy secreta de piegas y joy as de oro, que hera como tesoro 
de lo que abia heredado de su padre axayaca que no tocava 
En ello, y ansi mysmo nos llevaron aposentar aquella casa, 
por cavsa que como nos llamavan tevles, E por tales nos te- 
nian, questuviesemos Entre sus ydolos, como tevles q ally 
tenya. sea de vna manera o sea de otra, alii nos llevaron, 
donde tenian hechos grandes estrados y salas muy entolda- 
das de paramentos de la trra para nro capitan, y para cada 
vno de nosotros otras camas desteras, E vnos toldillos Enyi- 
ma, que no se da mas cama, por muy gran sefior que sea, 
porque no las vsan, y todos aquellos palagios, muy luzidos y 
encalados, y barridos y Enrramados, y como llegamos y en- 
tramos En vn gran patio, luego tomo por la mano el gran 
monteguma a nro capitan que alii le estuvo esperando, y le 
metio En el aposento y sala a donde avia de posar que le te- 
nia muy rricamente adereg ada, para segun su vsanza, y tenia 
aparejado vn muy rrico Collar de oro, de hechura de cama- 
rones, obta muy maravillosa, y el mismo montezuma se le 
hecho al cuello a nro capitan Cortes, que tuvieron bien que 
mirar sus capitanes del gran fabor que le dio, y desque se lo 
ovo puesto, cortes le dio las gragias con nras lenguas, e dixo 
monte§uma, malinchi, en vra casa estays vos, E vros herma- 
noe, descansa, y luego se fue a sus palagios, que no estavan 
lexos y nosotros rrepartimos nros aposentos por capitanias, 
E nra artilleria, asestada En parte conviniente, y muy bien 



272 

platicado la orden que en todo aviamos de tener, y estar 
muy aper§ebidos, ansi los de cavallo, como todos nros solda- 
dos, y nos tenian aparejada vna comida muy suntuosa, a su 
vso e costunbre, que luego comimos y fue esta nra venturo- 
sa E atrevida Entrada, En la gran ^ibdad de tenustitan 
mex°*^ a ocho dias del mes de novienbre, afio de nro saluar 
dor Jesuxpo, de mill E quinientos, y diez, y nueve aficw — 
gra^ias a nro senor Jesuxpo por todo, E puesto que no vaya 
expresado otras cosas q abia q dezir perdonenme sua mds, 
que no lo se mejor dezir por agora hasta su tpo. E dexemos 
de mas platicas, e bolvamos a nra rrela§ion de loque mas 
nos avino, lo qual dire adelante. 



C APITULO LXXXVITIT Como el gran mon- 
teQuma vino a nros aposentos, con muchos 
caciques que le aconpanavan e la pratica 
que tuvo con nro capitan — 




OMO el gran monte§uma ovo comido y supo que nro 
capitan y todos nosotros asi mismo abia buen rra- 
to que aviamos hecho lo mismo, vino a nro apo- 
sento con gran copia de prin^i pales, E todos debdos suyos, 
E con gran ponpa E como a Cortes le dixeron que venia le 
salio a mitad de la sala a rre^ebir y el monte5uma le tomo por 
la mano, E truxeron vnos como asentaderos, fechos a su vsan- 
za, e muy rricos, y labrados de muchas maneras con oro y el 
monte^uma dixo a nro capitan que se asentase, E se asenta- 
ron Entrahbos, cada vno en el suyo, y luego comen^o El 
monte§uma, vn muy buen parlamento, E dixo que En gran 
manera se holgava de tener En su casa, E rreyno, vnos ca- 
valleros tan esfor§ados como hera el capitan Cortes E todos 



278 

nosotros. E que avia dos afios que tuvo noti9ia de otro capi- 
tan que vino a lo de chanpoton e tanbien el afio pasado le 
truxeron nuevas de otro capitan que vino con quatro navios, 
E que sienpre los deseo ver, E que agora que nos tiene ya 
consigo, para servirnos y darnos de todo lo que tuviese y que 
. verdaderamente deve de ser §ierto, que somos los que sua an- 
tegesores, muchos tienpos pasados avian dho que vernian 
honbres de donde sale el sol, a sefLorear aquestas trras, y que 
devemos ser nosotros, pues tan balientemente peleamos En 

• lo de potonchan y tavascb, y con los tascaltecas, porque to- 

• das las batallas se las truxeron pintadas al natural, y cortes 
le rrespondio, con nras lenguas, que consigo sienpre Estavan, 
espegial la dona marina, y le dixo, que no sabe con que pa- 
gar el ni todos nosotros las grandes mds rregebidas de cada 
dia, E que giertamente veniamos de donde sale el sol, y so- 
mos vasallos y criados de vn gran sefior, que se dize El en- 
perador don carlos, que tiene subjetos a si, muchos y gran- 
des pringipes, E que teniendo notigia del, y de quan gran 
senor es, nos Enbio a estas partes a le ver, E A rrogar que 
sean xpianos, como es nro Enperador e todos nosotros, E 
que sal varan sus animas, el y todos sus vasallos, E que adelan- 
te le declarara mas, como y de q manera a de ser, y como 
adoramos a vn solo dios verdadero, y quien es, E otras mu- 
chas buenas cosas que oyra, como les avia dho A sus enba- 
j adores tendile, E pitalpitoque e quintal vor, cuando estava- 
moB en los arenales. e acabado este parlam*^ tenia apergebido 
el gran monteguma muy rricas joyas de oro, y de muchas 
echuras que dio a nro capitan, E ansi mismo a cada vno de 
nros capitanes dio cositas de oro y tres cargas de mantas de 
labores rricas de pluma, y Entre todos los soldados tanbien 
nos dio a cada vno a dos cargas de mantas, con vna alegria, 
E en todo bien paregia gran senor, y desque lo ovo rreparti- 
do pregunto a cortes, si heramos todos hermanos y vasallos 
de nro gran Enperador E dixo que si, que heramos herma- 
nos En el amor, e amistad, E personas muy pringipales, E 
criados de nro gran rrey y senor, y porque pasaron otras 
praticas, de buenos comedimientos Entre monteguma y cor- 

Bernal Dtac del Castillo.- 



274 

tes y por ser esta la primera vez que nos venia a visitar y 
por no le ser pesado, §esaron los rrazonamientos y avia man- 
dado el monteguma A sus mayordomos, que a nro modo y 
vsanza de todo, estuviesemos proveydos ques mayz, E pie- 
dras, E yndias para hazer pan, E gallinas y fruta, y mucha 
yerva para los cavallos, y el monte§uma se despidio con gran 
Cortesia de nro capitan y de todos nosotros, y salimos con 
el hasta la calle, y cortes nos mando que al presente que no 
fuesemos muy lexos de los aposentos, hasta Entender mas 
lo que conviniese. E quedarse a aqui, E dire lo que adelante 
paso — 



CAPITULO LXXXX como luego, otro dia, 
fue nro capitan a ver al gran montezuma 
y de (jiertas praticas que tuvieron. — 




TRO dia, acordo cortes, de yr a los pala§ios de mon- 
tezuma E primero Enbio a saber que hazia, y su- 
liese como y vamos, y llevo consigo quatro capita- 
nes, que fue pedro daluarado E juan velazquez de leon, E a 
diego de ordas, E a gon§alo de sandoval, y tanbien fuymos 
§inco soldados, y como el montezuma lo supo, salio a nos 
rres§ebir, a mitad de la sala, muy aconpanado de sus sobrinos, 
porque otros senores no entravan, ni comunicavan a donde 
El montezuma estava, si no eran en nego§ios, ynportantes, y 
con gran acato, que hizo a cortes, y cortes a el, se tomaron 
por las manos E a donde estava su estrado le hizo sentar, A 
la man derecha, E asi mismo nos mando asentar a todos nos- 
otros, En asientos que alii mando traer. E cortes les comen- 
§0 a hazer vn rrazonamiento, con nras lenguas dofia marina 
E aguilar, E dixo, que agora que, abia venido a ver, E ha- 
blar a vn tan gran senor como hera, y estava descansado, y 



276 

todos nosotros, pues A cunplido El viaje E mandado que 
nro gran rrey y senor le mando, E a lo que mas le viene a 
dezir, de parte de nro sefior dios Es que ya su md abra En- 
tendido de sus Enbaxadores, tendile, E pitalpitoque, E quin- 
talvor, quando nos hizo las mds de Enbiarnos la luna y el 
sol de oro al arena], como les diximos, que heramos xpianos, 
E adoramos a vn solo dios verdadero, q se dize Jesuxpo, El 
qual pade^*io muerte y pasion por nos salvar, y les dixi- 
mos, que vna cruz, que nos preguntaron por que la adora- 
vamos, que fue sefial de otra, donde nro senor dios, fue cru- 
^ificado por nra salva§ion, E que aquesta muerte y pasion, 
que premitio que ansi fuese, por salvar por ella todo el ly- 
naxe vmano, qstava perdido, y que aqueste nro dios, rresu- 
§ito al tergero dia, y esta en los fielos, y es el que hizo el 
§ielo y tierra, y la mar, y arenas, E crio todas las cosas que 
ay En el mundo, y da las aguas, y rro§ios, y ninguna cosa 
se haze En el mundo, sin su santa voluntad y q En el cre- 
hemos, E adoramos, E que aquellos, que ellos tienen por dio- 
ses que no lo son, sino diablos, que son cosas muy malas, y 
quales tienen las figuras, que peores tienen los fechos, E que 
mirasen quan malos son, E de poca valia, que a donde tene- 
mos puestas cruzes, Como las que vieron sus Enbaxadores, 
con temor dellas, no osan pares^er delante y quel tienpo an- 
dando lo veran, E lo que agora le pide por md queste aten- 
to a las palabras que agora le quiere dezir y luego le dixo, 
muy bien dado a Entender, de la creation del * mundo, E 
como todos somos hermanos, hijos de vn padre, E de vna 
madre que se dezian adan y Eva, E como tal hermano nro 
gran Enperador, doliendose de la perdigion de las animas 
que son muchas, las que aquellos sus ydolos llevan al ynfier- 
no, donde arden a bivas llamas, nos Enbio, para questo que 
aya oydo lo rremedie y no adorar aquellos ydolos, ni les sa- 
crifiquen mas yndios ni yndias, pues todos somos hermanos, 
ni consienta sodomias, ni rrobos, y mas les dixo, quel tienpo 
andando, enbiaria nro rrey y sefior, vnos honbres que Entre 
nosotros biven muy santamente mejores que nosotros, para 
que se lo den A Entender porque al presente, no venimos 



276 

mas de a se lo notificar, E ansi se lo pide por md, que lo ha- 
ga y cunpla. E porque pares^io quel montezuma queria rres- 
ponder geso cortes la pratica, E dixo, a todos noeotros que 
con El fuymos, con Esto cunplimos por ser El primer toque 
y El montezuma rrespondio, senor malinche, muy bien ten- 
go Entendido vras platicas y rrazonamientos, antes de agora, 
que a mis criados antes desto les dixistes En el arenal, Eso 
de tres dioses y de la cruz, y todas las cosas que En los pue- 
blos por donde aveys venido, aveys pedricado, no os Emos 
] rrespondido a cosa ninguna dellas porque desde av enigio 
. Aca, Adoramos nros dioses, y los tenemos por buenos, ansi 
deven ser los vros, E no cureys, mas, al presente, de nos ha- 
. blar dellos, y En eso de la cria§ion del mundo, ansi lo tene- 
, mos nosotros creydo, muchos tienpos a pasados, E a esta 
. cavsa tenemos por §ierto que soys los que nros antejesores 
nos dixeron que vernian de a donde sale El sol, E a ese vro 
gran rrey, yo le soy En cargo, y le dare de lo que tuviere, 
porque como dho tengo, otra vez, bien a dos afios, tengo noti- 
gia de capitanes que vinieron con navios, por donde vosotros 
venistes, y dezian que heran criados dese vro gran rrey que- 
rria saber, si soys todos vnos. E cortes le dixo que si, que 
todos heramos hermanos y criados de nro Enperador, E 
que aquellos vinieron a ver el camino E mares, E puertos, 
para lo saber muy bien y venir nosotros, como venimos. y 
dezialo el montezuma, por lo de franjisco hernandez de Cor- 
dova, E grixalva, quando venimos a descubrir la primera 
vez, y dixo que desde Entonges tuvo pensamiento de aver 
algunos de aquellos onbres que venian, pa tener En sus 
rreynos E gibdads para les honrar E que pues sus dioses les 
avian cunplido sus buenos deseos, E ya estavamos en su casa, 
las quales que se pueden Uamar nras que holgasemos y tu- 
viesemos descanso, que alii seriamos suidos, E que si algunas 
vezes nos Enbiava a dezir que no Entrasemos En su gibdad, 
que no hera de su voluntad, sino porque sus vasallos tenian 
temor que les dezian que hechavamos rrayos E rrelanpagos, 
E con los cavallos matavamos muchos yndios, y que hera- 
mos tevles bravos, E otras cosas de ninerias, E que agora que 



2V7 

a visto nras personas, E que somos de hueso E de carne y de 
mucha rrazon, E sabe que somos muy Esforjados, y por es- 
tas cavsas nos tiene en mucha mas estima que le avian dho 
E que nos daria de lo que tuviese, y Cortes E todos nosotros 
rrespondimos que se lo teniamos en gran md, tan sobrada 
voluntad. y luego ^1 montezuma dixo, rriendo, porque En 
todo hera muy rrego^ijado En su hablar de gra sei5or, ma- 
linche, bien se que te an dicho Esos de tascala con quien tan- 
ta amistad aveys tornado, que yo, que soy como dios o tevl, 
e que quanto ay En mis casas, es todo oro e plata, y piedras 
rricas bien tengo conosgido que como soys Entendidos, que 
no lo creheriades, y lo terniades por burla, lo que agora, senor 
malinche, veys, mi cuerpo de hueso y de carne, como los vros, 
mis casas y palagios de piedra, E madera, E cal, de senor, yo 
gran rrey, si soy, y tener rriquezas de mis ante§esores, si ten- 
go mas no las locuras E mentiras, que de mi os an dicho, an- 
si que tanbien lo terneys por burla, Como yo tengo de vros 
truenos y rrelanpagos. E cortes, le rrespondio tanbien rrien- 
do, E dixo que los cJntrarios, Enemigos, sienpre dizen cosas 
malas E sin verdad, de los que quieren mal, e que bien a co- 
nos^ido que otro senor, en estas partes, mas manifico, no le 
espera ver, E que no sin cavsa es tan nonbrado delante nro 
Enperador E estando En estas praticas, mando secretamente 
montezuma a vn gran cagiq sobrino suyo, de los questavan 
En su conpania, que mandasen a sus mayordomos que traxe- 
sen yiertas piegas de oro, que pares§e ser devieran estar apar- 
tadas, para dar a cortes, e diez cargas de rropa fina, lo qual 
rrepartio, el oro y mantas entre cortes E a los quatro capita- 
nes, E a nosotros los soldados nos dio A cada vno, dos coUa- 
res de oro, que baldria cada collar diez ps, E dos cargas de 
mantas. valia todo El oro, que Entonges dio, sobre mill pe- 
sos, y esto dava con vna alegria y seblante de grande E va- 
leroso sefLor E porque pasava la ora mas de medio dia, y 
por no le ser mas ynportuno le dixo cortes, senor montezu- 
ma, sienpre tiene por costunbre de echarnos vn cargo sobre 
otro En hazernos cada dia mds, ya es ora que v m coma y el 
montezuma rrespondio, que antes por averle ydo a visitar le 



ezimos mds, E ansi nos despedimos, con grandes cortesias del 
y nos fuymos a nros aposentos, E yvamos praticando de la 
buena manera, E crianga que En todo tenia, E que nOsotros 
En todo le tuviesemos mucho acato, E con las gorras de ar- 
mas colchadas quitadas, quando delante del pasasemos, E 
ansi lo haziamos, E dexemoslo aqui, E pasemos adelante. 



CAPITULO XCI— de la manera, E persona 
del gran monte^uma, y de quan grande 
senor hera. 




I RA el gran monteguma de hedad de hasta quarenta 
anos y de buena estatura e bien propor5ionado, E 
§enzefio, E pocas carnes, y la color ni muy more- 
no, sino propia color, E matiz, de yndio y traya los cabe- 
llos no muy largos, sino quanto le cubrian las orejas, E po- 
cas barbas prietas, y bien puestas E rralas, y el rrostro algo 
largo, E alegre e los ojos de buena manera, E mostrava En 
su persona. En el mirar, por vn cabo amor, E quando hera 
menester gravedad, Era muy polido, E linpio, bafiavase cada 
dia vna vez a la tarde ^ tenia muchas mugeres por amigas, 
hijas de senores, puesto q tenia dos grandes ca§icas, por sus 
legitimas mugeres, que quando vsava con ellas Era tan se- 
cretamente, que no lo alcan§avan a saber sino alguno de los 
que le Servian. Era muy linpio de sodomias, las mantas y 
rropas que se ponia vn dia, no se las ponia sino despues de 
quatro dias, tenia sobre dozientos prin^ipales de su guarda 
En otras salas junto a la suya, y estos no para que hablasen 
todos con el, sino qual y qual y quando le yvan a hablar se 
avian de quitar las mantas rricas, y ponerse otras de poca 

1 Test4ido en el original: "9erca del avemaria.*' 



279 

valia, mas avian de ser linpias y abian de entrar descalgos y 
los ojos baxos puestos En tierra y no miralle a la cara; y con 
tres rreverengias que le hazian e le dezian en ellas sefior, mi 
senor, mi gran sefior, primero que a el llegasen y desque le 
davan rrela§ion a lo que yvan, Con pocas palabras, les des- 
pachava no le boluian las espaldas al despedirse del, sinola 
cara, E ojos bajos En tierra hazia donde estava, e no bueltas 
las espaldas, hasta que salian de la sala. E otracosa vi, que 
quando otros grandes senores venian de lexos tierras a pley- 
tos o nego§ios, quando llegavan a los aposentos del gran 
montezuma, avian de venir descal§os, E con pobres mantas, 
y no avian de Entrar derecho En los palaQios, sino rrodear 
vn poco por vn lado de la puerta del palagio, que Entrar de 
rrota batida, tenianlo por desacato. En el comer, le tenian 
sus cozineros, sobre treynta maneras de guisados, hechos a 
su manera E vsan§a y tenianlos puestos En braseros de ba- 
rro chicos debaxo porq no se Enfriasen, E de aquello quel 
gran montezuma avia de comer, guisavan mas de trezientos 
platos, sin mas de mill, para la gente de guarda, y quando 
avia de comer, saliase El montezuma algunas vezes con sus 
pringipales, E mayordomos, y le sefialavan qual guisado Era 
mejor, E de que aves, E cosas estava guisado, y de lo que le 
dezian de aquello avia de comer, E quando salia a lo ver, 
eran pocas vezes, E como por pasatienpo. oy dezir que le so- 
lyan guisar carnes de muchachos de poca hedad, y como te- 
nia tantas diversidades de guisados, y de tantas Cosas, no lo 
hechavamos de ver si hera de carne vmana o de otras cosas 
porque cotidianamente le guisavan gallinas, gallos de papa- 
da, faysanes, perdizes de la tierra, codornizes, patos manzos 
E bravos, benado, puerco de la trra, pajaritos de cana, e pa- 
lomas, y liebres, y conexos, y muchas maneras de aves, E 
cosas que se crian En estas tierras, que son tantas, que no las 
acabare de nonbrar tan presto, E ansi no miramos En ello, 
mas se que giertamente, desque nro capitan le rreprehendia 
el sacrifigio, y comer de carne vmana, que desde Entonges 
mando que no le guisasen tal manjar dexemos de hablar En 
^sto, y bolvamos a la manera que tenia En su servigio, al 



280 

tienpo del comer || y es desta manera, que si hazia frio, te- 
nianle hecho mucha lunbre de asquas de vna lefia de corte- 
zas de arboles, que no hazian humo, el olpr de las cortezas 
de que hazian aquellos adquas, muy oloroso, y porque no le 
diesen mas calor de lo quel queria ponian delante, vna come 
tabla labrada con oro E otras figuras de ydolos, y el sentado 
En vn asentadero baxo, rrico E blando, y la mesa tanbien 
baja, fecha de la misma mafiera-de los sentaderos, e alii le 
ponian sus manteles, de mantas blancas, E vnos pafiyzuelos, 
algo largos, de lo raismo, y quatro mugeres muy hermosas, 
E linpias, le davan agua a manos, En vnos como a manera 
de aguamaniles hondos, que llaman xicales, ponian debajo, 
para rrecoger el agua, otros a manera de platos y le daban 
sus tobajas, E otras dos mugeres le trayan el pan de tortillas 
E ya que Encomengava A comer hechavanle delante vna 
como puerta de madera muy pintada de oro porque no le 
viesen Comer y estavan apartadas las quatro mugeres Apar- 
te E alii se le ponian a sus lados quatro grandes senores bie- 
jos e de edad En pie con quien el monte^uma de quando En 
quando praticava, E preguntava cosas y por mucho fabor 
dava a cada vno destos viejos vn plato de lo quel mas le sa- 
bia, E dezian que aquellos viejos heran sus debdos muy §er- 
. canos E consejeros y juezes de pleytos, y el plato y manjar 
que les dava el montezuma comian en pie E con mucho aca- 
'to, y todo sin miralle a la cara. serviase con barro de cholu- 
la, de vno Colorado, E otro prieto, mientras que comia, ni 
por pensamiento avian de hazer alboroto, ni hablar alto Icmb 
de su guarda, questavan En las salas §erca de la del monte- 
zuma trayanle fruta de todas quantas abia en la tierra, mas 
no comia sino muy poca de quando En quando. trayan En 
vnas como a manera de copas de oro fino con gierta bevida 
hecha del mismo cacao dezian q era para tener ayeso con 
mugeres y ententes no miravamos En ello, mas lo que yo vi, 
que trayan sobre §inquenta jarros grandes hechos de buen 
cacao, Con su espuma, y de aquello bevia y las mugeres le 
Servian al bever, con gran acato y algunas vezes al tienpo de 
comer, estavan vnos yndios corcobados, muy fees, porque 



281 

heran chicos de cuerpo, E quebrados por medio los cuerpos, 
. que Entre Ellos heran chocarreros, y otros yndios que de- 
'vieran ser truhanes, que le dezian grajias, E otros que le 
-cantavan y baylavan, porquel montezuma hera aficionado a 
•plazeres y cantares, E aquellos mandava dar los rrelieves y 
jarros del cacao y las mismas quatro mugeres, algavan los 
manteles, y le tornavan a dar aguamanos, E con mucho aca- 
to que le hazian E hablava el montezuma aqllos quatro prin- 
Qipales viejos, En cosas que le convenian y se despedian del 
con gran rreverengia que le tenian y el se quedava rreposan- 
do, y desque el gran montezuma Avia comido, luego comian 
todos los de su guarda, E otros muchos de sus servigiales de 
casa, y me paresge que sacavan sobre mill platos de aquellos 
majares que dho tengo, pues jarros de cacao, con su espuma, 
como entre mexicanos se haze mas de dos mill, y fruta yn- 
finita, pues para sus mugeres y criadas, E panaderas, e ca- 
caguateras, que gran costa ternia dexemos de hablar de la 
costa y comida de su casa y digamos de los mayordomos, E 
tesoreros, E despensas y botelleria y de los que tenian cargo 
de las casas a donde tenian el mayz, digo, que avia tanto 
quescrevir, Cada cosa por si, que yo no se por donde enco- 
mengar, sino questavamos admirados del gran con^ierto E 
abastOy que en todo tenia, y mas digo, que se me avia olvi- 
dado, que Es t)ien tomallo a rre§itar, y es, que le Servian al 
montefuma, estando a la mesa quado comia como dicho ten- 
go, otras dos mugeres muy agragiadas, de traer tortillas ama- 
sadas con huevos y otras Cosas sustangiosas, y heran muy 
blancas las tortillas y trayanselas en vnos platos cobijado 
con sus panos linpios, y tanbien le trayan otra manera de 
pan, que son como hollos largos hechos y amasados Con otra 
manera de cosas sustan§iales, y pan pachol que en esta trra 
asi se dize, ques a manera de vnas obleas tanbien le ponian 
en la mesa, tres cafiutos, muy pintados y dorados, y dentro 
tenian liquidanbar, rrebuelto con vnas yervas, que se dize 
tabaco, E quando acabava de comer despues que le avian 
baylado, y cantado, y algado la mesa, tomava el humo de 
vno de aquellos cafiutos y muy poco, y con ello se adormia. — 

Bernal Diaz del Ca8tUlo.-4l7. 



dexemos ya de dezir del servi§io de su mesa, y bolvamos a 
nra rrela§ion acuerdome, que hera En aquel tienpo su ma- 
yordomo mayor vn gran ca§ique, que le pusimos por nonbre 
tapia, y tenia quenta de todas las rrentas que le trayan al 
montezuma con sus libros, hechos de su papel, que se diz 
amal, y tenia destos libros vna gran casa dellos. dexemos de 
hablar de los libros y quentas, pues va fuerade nra rrelafion, 
y digamos como tenia montezuma dos casas llenas de todo 
genero de armas, y muchas dellas rricas, con oro y pedreria, 
donde heran rrodelas, grandes y chicas, y vnas como maca- 
nas y otras a manera de Espadas de a dos manos, Engastar 
das en ellas vnas navajas de pedernal, que cortan muy me- 
jor que nras espadas, E otras lan;as mas largas que no las 
nras, con vna bra§a de cuchilla, Engastadas en ellas muchas 
navajas, que avnque den Con ellas En vn broquel o rrodela, 
no saltan, E cortan En fin como navajas que se rrapan con 
ellas las cabegas, y tenia muy buenos arcos, y flechas, y va- 
ras de a dos gajos, y otros de a vno, con sus tiraderas y mu- 
chas hondas y piedras rrolli§as hechas a mano, y vnos como 
paveses que son de arte que las pueden arrollar arriba quan- 
do no pelean,porq no les estorve y al tienpo del pelear quando 
son menester, las dexan caer, E quedan cubiertos sus cuer- 
pos de arriba abajo. / tanbien tenia muchas armas de algodon 
colchadas y rricamente labradas por de fuera de plumas de 
muchos colores, a manera de di visas, E ynvin§iones, y te- 
nian otros como capa§etes y caxcos de madera, y de hueso, 
tanbien muy labrados de pluma, por de fuera y tenian otras 
armas de otras hechuras que por escusar prolixidad, lo dexo 
de dezir, y sus ofi§iales que sienpre labravan y entendian En 
ello, y mayordomos que tenian cargo de las armas. dexemos 
esto, y vamos a la casa de aves, y por fuerga E me detener 
En contar cada genero, de que calidad Eran, digo que desde 
aguilas rreales, y otras aguilas mas chicas E otras muchas 
maneras de aves de grandes cuerpos, hasta pajaritos muy chi- 
cos pintados de diversos colores, tanbien, donde hazen aque- 
Uos rricos plumajes que labran de plumas verdes, y las aves 
destas plumas son el cuerpo dellas a manera de las pleases 



que ay En nra espana, Uamanse en esta tierra que^ales y 
otros pajaroSy que tienen la pluma de since colores, que es 
verde y celorado, y bianco, y amarillo, y azul, estos no se 
como se llaman, pues papagayos, de otras diferenyiadas co- 
lores, tenia tantos que no se me acuerda los nonbres dellos 
dexemos patos de buena pluma, y otros mayores que les qria 
pares^er y de todas estas aves les pelava las plumas En tien- 
posque para ello Era convenible y tornavan a pelechar, y 
todas las mas aves que dho tengo, criavan En aquella casa, 
y al tienpo del Encoclar tenian cargo, de les hechar sus hue- 
vos giertos yndios, E yndias que miravan por todas las aves, 
E de alinpiarles sus nidos y darles de comer, y esto a cada 
genero de aves lo que hera su mantenimiento, y En aquella 
casa que dicho tengo avia vn gran estanque de agua dul§e 
y tenia En el otra manera de aves muy altas de §ancas, y co^ 
lorado todo El cuerpo y alas y cola, no se el nonbre dellas, : 
mas En la ysla de cuba las llamavan ypiris A otras como ^ 
ellas y tanbien En aquel estanque avia otras muchas rraleas ' 
de aves que sienpre esta van en el agua — dexemos esto, y / 
vamos a otra gran casa donde tenian muchos ydolos, y de- 
zian que heran sus dioses bravos y con ellos genero de ali- 
mafias, de tigres, y leones de dos maneras, vnos que son de 
hechura de lobos, que en esta trra se llaman adives y zorros, 
y otras alimanas chicas, y todas estas carni^eras se mantenian 
con came, y las mas dellas criavan En aquella casa, y las 
davan de comer benados, gallinas, perrillos y otras cosas que 
caQavan, y avn oy dezir que cuerpos de yndios de los que sa- 
crificavan, y es desta manera, que ya me abran oydo dezir 
que quando sacrificavan algun triste yndio, que le aserravan 
con vnos navajones de pedernal por los pechos y bulliendo 
le sacavan el cora§on y sangre y lo presentavan a sus ydolos. 
En cuyo nonbre hazian aquel sacrifigio, y luego les cortavan 
los muslos y bra§os y cabe§a y aquello comian En fiestas y 
banquetes, y la cabefa colgavan de vnas vigas, y el cuerpo 
del sacrificado, no llegavan a el para le comer, sino davanlo 
aqllos bravos animales, pues mas tenian en aqlla maldita ca- 
sa, muchas biuoras, y culebras, Enpongofiadas, que traen en la 



cola vno que suena, como cascaveles, estas son las peores biuo- 
ras de todas y tenianlas En vnas tinajas y en cantaros grandee, 
y en ellas mucha pluma, y alii ponian sus huevos, y criavan 
sus bivoreznos, y les davan a comer de los cuerpos de los yn- 
dios que sacrificavan, y otras carnes de perros de los q ellos so- 
lyan criar, y avn tuvimos por gierto que quando nos hecharon 
de mex*^ y nos mataron sobre ocho§ientos de nros soldados 
que de los muertos mantuvieron muchos dias aquellas fieras 
all mafias y culebras, segun dire En su tpo y sazon y aques- 
tas culebras y alimanas tenian ofregidos Aquellos sus ydolos 
bravos, para questuviesen En su conpania. digamos agora 
las cosas ynfernales quando bramavan los tigres y leones y 
avllavan los adives y zorros y silvavan las sierpes, hera gri- 
ma oyllo, y paresgia ynfierno. pasemos adelante y digamos 
de los grandes ofi§iales que tenia de cada ofigio, que entre- 
Uos se vsavan comenQemos por lapidarios y plateros de oro 
y plata, y todo vaziadizo, que En nra espafia, los grandes pla- 
teros, tienen que mirar En ello, y destos tenia tantos y tan 
primos En vn pueblo que se dize escapuijalco, vna legua de 
mx*^/. pues labrar piedras finas y chalchivis, que son como 
esmeraldas, otros muchos grandes maestros. / vamos adelan- 
te a los grandes ofi^iales de asentar de pluma, y pintores y 
entalladores muy sublimados, que por lo que agora Emos 
visto la obra que hazen ternemos considera§ion en lo que 
Entonges labravan, que tres yndios ay agora en la 5ibdad de 
mx~ tan primisimos En su ofi§io, de Entalladores y pinto- 
res, que se dizen marcos de aquino, y joan de la cruz; y el 
crespillo, que si fueran en el tienpo de aquel antiguo o afa- 
mado apeles, o de micael angel o berruquete q son de nros 
tpos tanbien les pusieran En el numero dellos. pasemos ade- 
lante y vamos a las yndias tejedoras o lavanderas, que le 
hazian tanta multitud de rropa fina, Con muy grandes labo- 
res de plumas, de donde mas cotidianamente le trayan Era 
de vnos pueblos y provin§ia, questa En la costa del norte de 
cabe la veracruz, que se dezian cotastan, muy gerca de san 
juan de vlua, donde desenbarcamos quando venimos con cor- 
tes./E en su casa del mismo gran montezuma, todas las hi- 



jas de sefiores quel tenia por amigas, sienpre texian cosas 
muy primas, E otras muchas hijas de vezinos mexicanos, 
questavan como a manera de rrecogimiento, que querian pa- 
res^er monjas, tanbien texian y todo de pluma. estas monjas 
. tenian sue casas ^erca del gran Cu del vichilobos, y por de- 

• bo^ion suya o de otro ydolo de muger que dezian que hera 

• 8u abogada para casamientos las metian sua padres En aque- 
- Ua rreligion hasta que se casavan y de alii las sacavan para las 

casar. pasemos adelante y digamos de la gran cantidad que 
tenia el gran monteQuma de bayladores y danyadores, e otros 
que traen vn palo con los pies, y de otros que buelan quan- 
do baylan por alto, y de otros que pares9en como matachi- 
nes, y estos heran para dalle plazer digo que tenia vn barrio 
destos que no Entendian En otra cosa pasemos adelante, E 
digamos de los ofi9iales que tenia de canteros, e albanires, 
carpinteros, que todos entendian En las obras de sus casas. 
tanbien digo que tenia tantas quantas queria, no olvidemos 
las huertas de flores y arboles olorosos, y de los muchos ge- 
neros que dellos tenia y el con9ierto y paseaderos dellas y de 
sus albercas, E estanques de agua du§e, como biene el agua 
por vn cabo, E ba por otro, E de los bafios que dentro tenia, 
y de la diversidad de pajaritos chicos que En los arboles cria- 
van, y de que yervas medezinales y de provecho que En ellas 
tenia. Era cosa de ver, y para todo esto, muchos ortelanos, y 
todo labrado de canteria E muy Encalado, ansi vanos como 
paseaderos y otros rretretes, E apartamentos como §enaderos, 
y tanbien a donde bay la van, E can ta van, E avia tan to que 
mirar En esto de las huertas, Como en todo lo demas, que no 
nos hartavamos de ver su gran poder, E ansi por el consi- 
guiente tenia quantos ofi9ios Entre ellos se vsavan de todos 
gran cantidad de yndios maestros dellos, e^porque yo es- 
toy harto descrevir sobre esta materia, y mas lo estaran los 
curiosos letores lo dexare de dezir E dire como fue nro cor- 
tes con muchos de nros capitanes, E soldados a ver el tute- 
lulco, ques la gran pla9a de mex"* y subimos en alto Cu, 
donde estavan sus ydolos, tezcatepuca y su vichilobos. E es- 
ta fue la primera vez, que nro capitan salio a ver la 9ibdad, 
y lo que En ello mas paso. 



is6 



CAPITULO XCII — como nro capitan salio 
a ver la ^ibdad de mex~ y el tatelulco, ques 
la pla^a mayor, y el gran Cu de su vichi- 
lobos, y lo que mas paso. 




OMO avia ya quatro dias, questavamos En mexico, 
y no salia el capitan ni ninguna de nosotros de 
los aposentos, E5eto a las Casas E huertas nos di- 
xo Cortes que seria bien yr a la plaga mayor y ver El gran 
adoratorio de su vichilobos y q queria Enbiallo a dezir al 
gran montezuma, que lo tuviese por bien, y para ello enbio 
por mensagero a geronimo de aguilar E a dofia marina, E 
con el los a vn pajecillo de nro capitan que Entendia ya algo 
la lengua que se dezia orteguilla, y el montezuma como lo 
supo, Enbio a dezir que fuesemos mucho En buen ora, y por 
otra parte temio no le fuesemos a hazer algun desonor En sus 
ydolos y acordo de yr el en persona, con muchos de sus prin- 
(;ipales, y en sus rricas andas salio de sus pala^ios asta la mi- 
tad del camino, cabe vnos adoratorios, se apeo de las andas, 
porque tenia por gran desonor de sus ydolos, yr hasta su ca- 
sa e adoratorio de aquella manera y llebavanle de bra§o gran- 
des pringipales, yvan adelante del, sefiores de vasallos E lle- 
bavan delante dos bastones como setros al§ados En alto, que 
hera senal que yva alii El gran monte§uma, y quando yva 
En las andas llebava vna varita medio de oro, y medio de 
palo, levantada, Como vara de justigia, y ansi se fue, y su- 
bio En su gran Cu aconpaftado de muchos papas, y comenzo 
a sahumar y hazer otras §erimonias Al vichilobos. dexemos 
al monteguma, que ya avia ydo adelante, como dho tengo, y 
bolvamos a cortes y a nros capitanes y soldados, que como 
sienpre teniamos por costunbre, de noche y de dia, estar ar- 



287 

mados, y asi nos via estar el montezuma quando le yvamo^ 
a ver, no lo tenia por cosa nueva, digo esto, porque a cavallo 
nro capitan, con todos los demas que tenian cavallo, y la mas 
parte de nros soldados, muy apergebidos, fuymos al tutelul- 
co, yvan muchos caQiques quel monte§uma Enbio para que 
nos aconpanasen, y desque llegamos a la gran pla9a, que se 
dize El tatelulco, Como no aviamos visto tal cosa, quedamos 
admirados de la multitud de gente y mercaderias que En 
ella avia^ y del gran con5ierto y rregimiento, que en todo 
tenian y los principal es que yvan con nosotros, nos lo yvan 
mostrando, cada genero de mercaderias estavan por si, y te- 
nian situados y sefialados sus asientos, comenyemos por los 

, mercaderes de oro y plata, y piedras rricas y plumas y man- 
tas, y cosas labradas y otras mercaderias de yndios esclavos, 
y esclavas, digo que trayan tantos dellos a vender aqlla gran 
pla^a, como traen los Portugueses los negros de guinea, e 
trayanlos atados En vnas varas largas Con colleras a los pes- 

' cue§os, porque no se les huyesen y otros dexavan sueltos. 
luego estavan otros mercaderes que vendian rropa mas basta 
y algodon, E cosas de hilo toryido y cacahuateros que ven- 
dian cacao, y desta manera estavan quantos generos de merca- 
derias ay en toda la nueva espana, puesto por su congierto de 
la manera que ay En mi tierra, ques medina del canpo, don- 
de se hazen las ferias, que En cada calle estan sus mercade- 
rias por si, ansi estavan En esta gran plaga y los que ven- 
dian mantas de nequen y sogas y cotaras que son los gapatos 
que cal9an y hazen del mismo arbol, y rrayzes muy dul§es, 
cozidas y otras rrebusterias que sacan del mismo arbol todo 
estava en vna parte de la pla§a En su lugar sefialado, y cue- 
ros de tigres de leones, y de nutras y de adives y de benados, 
y de otras alimafias, E texones y gatos monteses, dellos ado- 
vados y otros sin adovar, estavan En otra parte, y otros ge- 
neros de cosas e mercaderias. pasemos adelante y digamos 
de los que vendian frisoles y chia, y otras legunbres, E yer- 
vas, a otra parte, vamos a los que vendian gallinas, gallos de 
papada, conexos liebres benados y anadones perrillos y otras 
cosas deste arte, a su parte de la pla9a. digamos de las frute- 



288 

ras, de las que vendian cosas cozidas, ma§a morreras y mal- 
coginado, tanbien a su parte, pues todo genero de 109a, hecha 
de mill maneras, desde tinajas grandea, y xarrillos chicos 
questavan por si, aparte y tanbien los q vendian miel y mel- 
cochas, y otras golosinas que hazian como nuegados, pues los 
q vendian madera, tablas, cunas, E vigas E tajos y vanoos, 
y todo por si. vamos a los q vendian lena ocote, e otras cosas 
desta manera. que quieren ma^ que diga, que hablando con 
aCato, tanbien vendian muchas canoas llenas de yenda de 
honbres, que tenian En los esteros gerca de la pla§a y esto 
hera para hazer sal o pa cortyr Gueros que sin ella dizen que 
no se hazia buena. bien tengo Entendido q Algunos sefiores 
se rreyran desto, pues digo ques ansi, y mas digo, que tenian 
por costunbre que En todos los caminos tenian hechos de ca- 
nas o pajas, o yerva, porque no los viesen los que pasasen 
por ellos, alii se metian, si tenian ganas de purgar los vien- 
tres, porque no se les perdiese aquella §u5iedad. pa que gas- 
to yo tantas palabras, de lo q vendian En aquella gran pla- 
5a porques para no acavar tan presto de con tar por menudo 
todas las cosas, sino que papel, que En esta trra llaman 
amal, y vnos canutos de olores, con liquidanbar, Uenos de 
tabaco, y otros vnguentos amarillos y cosas deste arte, ven- 
dian por si, e vendian mucha grana debajo los portales, que 
Estavan En aquella gran plaga, avia muchos erbolarios y 
raercaderias de otra manera y tenian alii sus casas a donde 
juzgavan tres juezes, y otros como alguaziles, Esecu tores, que 
miravan las mercaderias. olvidadoseme avia la sal y los 
que hazian navajas de pedernal y de como las sacavan de la 
misma piedra, pues pescaderas y otros q vendian vnos pane- 
zillos, que hazen de vno como lama, que coxen de aquella 
gran laguna, que se cuaxa, y hazen panes dello, que tienen, 
vn sabor a manera de queso, y vendian hachas de laton y co- 
bre y estano, y xicaras y vnos jarros muy pintados de made- 
ra hechos. ya querria aver acabado de dezir todas las cosas 
que alii se vendian, porque heran tantas de diversas y cali- 
dades que para que lo acabaramos de ver E ynquirir, que 
Como la gran plaga Estava Uena de tanta gente y toda yer- 



289 

cada de portales, En dos dias no se biera todo y fuymos al 
gran Cu, E ya que y vamos 5erca de bus grandes patios, E an- 
tes de salir de la misma pla^a, Estavan otros muchos merca- 
deres, que segun dixeron heran de los que trayan a vender 
oro En granos Como lo sacan de las minas metido El oro En 
vnos canutillos delgados de los de ansarones de la tierra, E 
ansi blancos porque se pares^iese el oro por de fuera, y por el 
largor y gordor de los canutillos tenian Entre ellos su quen- 
ta, que tantas mantas, o que xiquipiles de cacao valia, o que 
esclavos o otra cualquiera cosa a que lo trocavan E ansi de- 
xamos la gran plaQa, sin mas la ver, y Uegamos a los grandes 
patios y (ercas donde Esta el gran cu y tenia antes de llegar a 
el vn gran cercuyto de patios, que me pare89e que heran mas 
que la pla^a que ay En salamanca, y con dos ^ercas al rre- 
dedor de calicanto, e El mismo patio y sitio todo Enpedrado 
de piedras grandes, de losas blancas, y muy lisas, E a donde 
no avia de aquellas piedras, e^tava encalado y brufiido y 
todo muy linpio, que no hallaran vna paja, ny poluo En to- 
do El y desque Uegamos Qerca del gran cu, antes que su- 
biesemos ninguna grada del, Enbio el gran montezuma, 
desde arriba, donde Estava haziendo sacrifi9ios, seys papas 
y dos prinyipales, para que aconpafiasen a nro Capitan, e 
al subir de las gradas que heran §iento y catorze, le yvan 
a tomar de los bra§os, para le ayudar a subir, creyendo que 
se cansaria, Como ayudavan a su sefior monte9uma, y cortes 
no quiso, que llegasen a el, y desque subimos a lo alto del 
gran Cu, En vna pla^eta, que arriba se azia a donde tenian 
vn espaQio como andamios, y En ellos puestas vnas grandes 
piedras, a donde ponian los tristes yndios para sacrificar e 
alii avia vn gran bulto, de como dragon, E otras malas figu- 
ras y mucha sangre derramada de aquel dia, e ansi como Ue- 
gamos salio El montezuma de vn adoratorio, a donde Esta- 
van BUS malditos ydolos, que hera En lo alto del gran Cu y 
vinieron con el dos papas, y con mucho acato, que hizieron 
a cortes E a todos nosotros, le dixo, cansado estareys, sefior 
malinche, de subir a este nro gran tenplo, y cortes le dixo, 
con nras lenguas que yvan con nosotros, que el ny nosotros 

Bernal Dlas d^l CaatiUo.— 88. 



290 

no nos cansavamos en cosa ninguna, y luego le tomo per 
la mano, y le dixo, que mirase su gran gibdad, y todas las 
mas gibdades que avia dentro en el agua, £ otros muchos 
pueblos al rrededor de la misma laguna en tierra, y que si 
no avia visto muy bien su gran plaga, que desde alii la po- 
dria ver muy mejor, E ansi lo estuvimos mirando, porque 
desde aquel grande y maldito tenplo estava tan alto, que to- 
do lo sefioreava muy bien y de alii vimos las tres calQadas 
que Entran En mexico ques la de ystapalapa, que fue por 
la que Entramos quatro dias avift, y la de tacuba, que fue 
por donde despues salimos huyendo la noche de nro gran 
. desbarate quando Cuedlabaca nuevo sefior nos hecho de la 
9ibdad, como adelante diremos y la de tepeaquilla y viamoB 
el agua dulge que venia de chapultepeq de que se proveya la 
gibdad, y en aquellas tres cal^adas, las puentes que tenian 
hechas de trecho a trecho, por donde Entrava y salia el agua 
de la laguna, de vna parte a otra, E viamos En aquella gran 
laguna, tanta multitud de canoas vnas venian con bastimen- 
tos E otras qile boluian con cargas y mercaderias E viamos 
que cada casa de aquella gran 9ibdad y de todas las mas (ib- 
dades, questavan pobladas En el agua, de casa a casa, no se 
pasaba sino por vnas puentes levadizas que tenian hechas de 
madera, o En canoas y viamos. En aquellas gibdades. Cues 
y adoratorios, a manera de torres, E fortalezas, y todas blan- 
queando, que hera cosa de admiration y las casas de a9oteas 
E en las calgadas otras torrezillas, E adoratorios que heran 
como fortalezas, y despues de bien mirado y considerado to- 
do lo que aviamos visto, tornamos a ver la gran pla^a y la 
multitud de gente que En ella abia, vnos conprando, e otros 
vendiendo, que solamente el rremor y zumbido de las bozes 
y palabras que alii avia, sonava mas que de vna legua, e En- 
tre nosotros wo soldados que avian estado En muchas par- 
tes del mundo, E en costantinopla E en toda ytalia, y rroma 
y dixeron que pla^a tan bien conpasada, y con tanto con- 
9ierto, y tamafia, E llena de tanta gente, no la avian visto, 
dexemos esto, y bolvamos a nro Gapitan, que dixo a fray 
bartolome de olmedo, ya otras vezes por mi memorado, que 



^1 

alii se hallo, pares^eme, sefior padre que sera bien que de- 
mos vn tiento a montezuma sobre que nos dexe hazer aqui 
nra yglesia, y el padre dixo, que sera bien, si aprovechase, 
mas que le pares^ia, que no hera cosa convenible hablar en 
tal tienpo, que no via al montezuma de arte, que En tal co- 
sa consediese, y luego nro cortes dixo al montezuma, con 
dofia marina la lengua, muy gran sefior es v m y de mucho 
mas es meregedor, Emos holgado de ver vras gibdades, lo 
que OS pido por md, que pues questamos aqui, en este vro 
tenplo que nos mostreys vros dioses y tevles, y el montezu- 
ma dixo, que primero hablaria con sus grandes papas, E lue- 
go que con ellos ovo hablado, dixo, que Entrasemos En vna 
torrezilla E apartamiento A manera de sala, donde estavan 
dos como altares, con muy rricas tablazones En9ima del te- 
cho, e En cada altar estavan dos bultos, como de gigante de 

^ muy altos cuerpos, y muy gordos, y el primero questava a 
man derecha, dezian que hera el de vichilobos su dios de la 
guerra, y tenia la cara y rrostro muy ancho, y los ojos dis- 

- formes, E espantables. En todo el cuerpo tanta de la pedre- 
ria, E oro y perlas, E aljofar pegado Con engrudo, que ha- 
zen En esta tierra de vnas como rrayzes, que todo el cuerpo 
y cabe§a estava lleno dello, y ^efiido el cuerpo vnas a ma- 
nera de grandes culebras, hechas de oro, E pedreria E en vna 
mano tenia vn arco, E en otra vnas flechas. E otro ydolo 
pequefio, que alii cabel estava, que dezian que hera su paje 
le tenia vna langa no larga y vna rrodela muy rrica de oro 
E pedreria, E tenia puestos al cuello. El vichilobos vnas ca- 
ras de yndios y otros como corayones de los mismos yndios, 
y estos de oro, y dellos de plata con mucha pedreria Azules y 
estava alii vnos braseros con En§ienso, que Es su copal y con 
tres coragones de yndios que aquel dia avian sacrificado e 
se quemavan, y con el humo y copal, le avian hecho aql 
sacrifi^io, y estavan todas las paredes de aquel adoratorio, 
tan vafiado y negro de costras de sangre y ansi mismo el 
suelo, que todo hedia muy malamente — luego vimos a otra 
parte de la mano izquierda, Estar el otro gra bulto del altor 
del vichilobos, y tenia vn rrostro como de oso E vnos ojos. 



que le rrelunbravan, hechos de sus espejos que se dize tezcat, 
y el cuerpo con rricas piedras pegadas segun y de la mane- 
ra del otro su vichilobos, porque segun dezian Entranbos 
. heran hermanos, y este tezcatepuca, hera el dios de los yn- 
^ fiernos, y tenia cargo de las animas de Jos mexicanos, y te- 
nia §enido al cuerpo vnas figuras como diablillos chicos y 
las colas dellos como sierpes, y tenia En las paredes tantas 
costras de sangre y el suelo todo bafiado dello, como En los 
mataderos de castilla no avia tanto hedor, E alii le tenian 
#s^ presentado §inco cora§ones de aquel dia sacrificados, y En 
' lo mas alto de todo el Cu, estava otra Concavidad muy rri- 
camente labrada la madera della, y estava otro bulto, como 
de medio honbre y medio lagarto, todo Ueno de piedras rri- 
cas y la mitad del Enmantado. Este dezian quel cuerpo del 
estava lleno de todas las semillas que avia En toda la tierra, 
y dezian que hera el dios de las sementeras y firutas no se 
mie acuerda el nonbre, y todo estaba lleno de sangre, Asi 
•paredes como altar, y hera tanto el hedor que no viamos la 
hora que salirnos afuera, y alii tenian vn atanbor muy gran- 
de en demasia, que quando le tafiian El sonido del hera tan 
triste y de tal manera como dizen, estrumento de los ynfier- 
nos, y mas de dos leguas de alii se oya. dezian que los cue- 
ros de aquel atanbor heran de sierpes muy grandes, E en 
aquella pla^eta tenian tantas cosas muy diabolicas de ver, 
de bozinas y tronpetillas y navajones, y muchos coragones de 
yndios, que avian quemado, con q sahumaron aquellos sus 
ydolos, y todo quaxado de sangre, tenian tanto, que los doy 

La la maldigion y como todo hedia a carne5eria, no viamos la 
ora de quitarnos de tan mal hedor y peor vista, y nro capi- 
tan dixo a montezuma, con nra lengua, como medio rriyen- 
do, senor montezuma, no se yo como vn tan gran senor, e 
sabio varon, como v m es no aya colegido En su pensamien- 
to, Como no son estos vros ydolos dioses, sino cosas malas, 
que se llaman diablos, y para q v m lo conozca, y todos sus 
papas lo vean claro, hazeme vna md, que ayays por bien que 
En lo alto de esta torre, pongamos vna cruz, E en vna parte 
destos adoratorios donde estan vros vichilobos E tezcatepuca, 



haremod vn apartado, donde pongamos vna ymagen de nra 
sefiora la qual ymagen ya el montezuma la avia visto, y ve- 
reys al temor que dello tienen Esos ydolos, q os tienen en- 
ganados y el monteauma rrespondio medio Enojado y dos 
papas que con el estavan mostraron malas sefiales, y dixo 
.sefior malinche, si tal desonor como as dho creyera que avias 
, de dezir, no te mostrara mis dioses, Aquestos tenemos por 
t muy buenos, y ellos nos dan salud y aguas y buenas semen- 
' teras, E tenporales y vitorias quantas queremos, E tenemos- 
.-los de adorar y sacrificar lo.que os ruego es, que no se diga 
otras palabras en su desonor y desque aquello lo oyo nro ca- 
pitan, y tan alterado no le rreplico mas En ello, y con cara 
alegre le dixo, ora es que v m y nosotros nos vamos, y el 
montezuma rrespondio, que hera bien, E que porquel tenia 
que rezar E hazer gierto sacrifigiOj En rreconpensa del gran 
tatacul, que quiere dezir pecado, que avia hecho En dexar- 
nos subir En su gran Cu, E ser cavsa de que nos dexase ver 
sus dioses, E del desonor que les hizimos En dezir mal dellos 
que antes que se fuese lo avia de rrezar, E adorar y cortes 
le dixo, pues que ansi es, perdone sefior, E luego nos baxa- 
mos, las gradas Aba:3^o, y como heran giento y catorze, E 
algunos de nros soldados estavan malos de buvas o hu- 
mores, les dolieron los muslos del abaxar, y dexare de ha- 
blar de su adoratorio y dire lo que me parege del §ercuy to y 
manera que tenia, y si no lo dixere tan al natural, como he- 
ra, no se; maravillen, porque En aquel tienpo tenia otro pen- 
sami^ de Ent^nder En lo que trayamos Entre manos, que es 
En lo militar y en lo que mi capitan me mandava, y no En 
hazer rrelagiones. bolvamos a nra materia, pare^eme quel 
^ircuyto del gran cu, seria de seys grandes solares, de los que 
dan En esta tierra, y desde abajo hasta arriba, a donde Es- 
tava vna torrezilla, E alii Estavan sus ydolos, va Estrechan- 
do, y En medio del alto Cu hasta lo mas alto del, van, qin- 
co concavidades a manera de barbacanas, y descubiertas sin 
manparos, y porque ay muchos Cues, pintados en rreposte- 
ros de conqqistadores, E en vno que yo tengo, que cualquie- 
ra dellos a quien los an visto, podran colegir la manera que 



i94 

tenian por de fuera, mas lo que yo vi y entendi, E dello ovo 
fama en aquellos tienpos, que fundaron aquel gran Cu, en 
el gimiento del avian ofre;ido de todos los vezinos de aque- 
11a gran gibdad, oro y plata E aljofar, E piedras rricas, E 
que le avian baflado con mucha sangre de yndios, que sa- 
crificaron, que avian tornado En las guerras, y de toda ma- 
nera de diversidad de semillas que avia En toda la tierra, 
porque les di^en sus ydolos, bitorias E rriquezas, y muchos 
frutos. diran agora algunos letores muy curiosos, que como 
pudimos alcangar a saber que En el gimiento de aquel gran 
Cu, hecharon oro y plata, E piedras de chalchivis rricas y 
semillas y lo rro^iavan con sangre humana de yndios que sa- 
crificavan aviendo sobre mill afios que se fabrico y se hizo, 
a esto doy por rrespuesta, que desque ganamos aquella fuer- 
te E gran ^ibdad, y se rrepartieron los solares, que luego pro- 
pusimos que En aquel gran Cu aviamos de hazer la yglesia 
de nro patron E guiador sefior Santiago, E cupo mucha par- 
te de la del solar del alto Cu para el solar de la santa ygle- 
sia, de aquel Cu de vichilobos, y qxiando abrian los jimien- 
tos, para hazellos mas fixos, hallaron mucho oro, y plata, £ 
chachiuis y perlas, E aljofar y otras piedras, E ansi mismo, 
a vn vezino de mex~ que le cupo otra parte del mismo solar 
hallo lo mismo, y los ofigiales de la hazienda de su mages- 
tad lo demandavan por de su m que le venia de derecho, y 
sobre ello ovo pleyto e no se me acuerda lo que paso* mas 
que se ynformaron de los caciques y prin^ipales de mex** y 
guatemuz, que Entonyes hera bivo, E dixeron ques verdad, 
que todos los vezinos de mex~ de aquel tienpo, hecharon 
En los 9imientos, aquellas joyas, y todo lo demas, E que 
ansi lo tenian por memoria En sus libros, y pinturas de co- 
sas antiguas, e por esta cavsa aquella rriqza se qdo para la obra 
de la santa yglesia de s. Santiago, dexemos desto y digamos de 
los grandes y sontuosos patios questavan delante del vichi- 
lobos a donde esta agora sefior Santiago, que se dize El tate- 
lulco porque ansi se solia llamar ya he dicho que tenian dos 
^ercas de calicanto antes de Entrar dentro, E que hera En^ 
pedrado, de piedras blancas, como losas, y muy Encalado, y 



brufiido y linpio, y seria de tanto conpas, y tan ancho, como 
la pla^a de salamanca, y vn poco apartado del gran cu, esta- 
va otra torrezilla que tanbien hera casa de ydolos o puro y n* 
fierno, porque tenia a la boca de la vna puerta vna muy es- 
pantable boca de las que pintan que dizen q estan En los 
ynfiernos, con la boca abierta y grandes colmillos para tra- 
gar las animas, £ ansi mismo Estavan vnos bultos de dia- 
blos y cuerpos de sierpes, junto a la puerta, y tenian vn po- 
co apartado vn sacrificadero, y todo ello muy Ensangrentado 
y negrOy de humo E costras de sangre y tenian muchas oUas 
grandes y cantaros, y tinajas dentro, En la casa, Uenas de 
agua, que hera alii donde cozinavan la came de los tristes 
yndios que sacrificavan, que Comian los papas, porque tan- 
bien tenian cabe El sacrificadero muchos navajones y vnos 
tajos de madera, Como En los que cortan came En las car- 
nes^erias, y ansi mismo detras de aquella maldita casa bien 
apartado de ella estavan vnos grandes rrimeros de lefia y no 
muy lexos vna gran alberca de agua que se hinchia y vazia- 
va que le venia por su cafio Encubierto de lo que Entrava 
En la fibdad de chapultepeque yo sienpre le Uamava aqlla 
casa el ynfierno pasemos adelante del patio, y vamos a otro 
Cu, donde hera Enterramientos de grandes sefiores mexica- 
nos, que tanbien tenian otros muchos ydolos, y todo lleno 
de sangre E humo, y tenia otras puertas y figuras de ynfier- 
no, y luego junto de aquel Cu, estava otro lleno de calaber- 
nas, E yancarrones, puestos con gran congierto, que se podian 
ver, mas no se podrian contar, porq heran muchas, y las ca- 
labernas por si y los ^ancarrones En otros rrimeros, E alii 
avia otros ydolos, y En cada casa, o Cu, y adoratorio que E 
dicho, estavan papas con sus vestiduras largas de mantas prie- 
tas y las capillas largas asimismo como de dominicos que tan- 
bien tiravan vn poco a las de los canonigos y el cavello muy 
largo y hecho, que no se puede despar^ir ni desenrretrar y 
todos los mas sacrificadas las orejas E en los mismos cavellos 
mucha sangre pasemos adelante, que avia otros cues aparta- 
dos vn poco donde Estavan las calabernas que tenian otros 
ydolos y 8acrifi9ios de otras malas pinturas, E aquelios ydo- 



296 

los dezian que heran abogados de los casamientos de los hon- 
bres. no quiero detenerme mas, En contar de ydolos, sino so- 
lamente dire que al rrededor de aquel gran patio, avia mu- 
chas casas e no altas, E eran a donde pasavan, E rresidian 
los papas, E otros yndios que tenian cargo de los ydolos y 
tanbien tenian otra miiy mayor alberca, o estanque de agua 
y muy linpia A vna part6 del gran Cu, Era dedicada sola- 
mente para El servigio del vichilobos e tezcatepucay entra- 
va el agua En'aquella itlberca por cafios encubiertos que ve- 
nia de chapultepeque, E alii ^erca estavan otros grandes apo- 
sentos, a manera de monasterio a dotide estavan rrecogidas 
muchas hijas de vezinos mexicano's coino monjas, hasta que 
se casavan y alii estavan dos bultos de ydolos de mugeres 
que heran abogadas de los casamientos de las mugeres, E 
aquellos sacrificavan y hazian fiestas {)ara que les diesen bue- 
nosmaridos: mucho me he detenido, En contar de este gran 
Cu, del tatelulco, y sus patios, pues digo hera El mayor ten- 
plo de todo mexico, porque avia tantos E muy suntuosos, que 
Entre quatro, o §inco perrochas o barrios, tenian vn adora- 
torio, y sus ydolos, y porq heran muchos, E yo no se la quen- 
ta de todos, pasare adelante y dire que En cholula, el gran 
adoratorio que En el tenian, hera de mayor altor, que no el 
de mx~ porque tenia giento y veynte gradas, y segun dezian, 
el ydolo de cholula, tenianle por bueno, E yban a el En rro- 
meria, de todas partes de la nueva espana a ganar perdones, 
E a esta cavsa le hizieron tan santuoso Cu, mas era de otra 
hechura quel mexicano, E ansi mismo los patios, muy gran- 
des E con dos gercas. tanbien digo quel Cu de la gibdad de 
tezcuco, Era muy alto de giento y diez y siete gradas, y los 
patios anchos y buenos, e hechos de otra manera que los de- 
•mas, y vna cosa de rreyr es, que tenian En cada provingia 
sus ydolos, y los de la vna provingia, o §ibdad, no aprove- 
chava a los otros, E ansi tenian ynfinitos ydolos, E a todos 
- sacrificavan. y despues que nro capitan y todos nosotros nos 
cansamos de andar y ver tantas diversidades de ydolos y sus 
sacrifi§ios, nos boluimos a nros aposentos y sienpre muy acon- 
pafiados de pringipales y caciques, que montezuma Enbia- 



297 

va con nosotros y quedarse a aqui y dire lo que mas hizi- 
mos — 



CAPITULO XCIII. como hizimos lira ygle- 
sia E altar En nro aposento y vna cruz 
fuera del aposento, y lo que mas pasamos, 
E hallamos la sala y rrecamara del tesoro 
del padre del montezuma y de como se 
acordo prender al montezuma — 




OMO nro capitan cortes y el frayle de la md vieron 
que montezuma no tenia voluntad que En el Cu 
de su vichilobos pusiesemos la cruz, ni fiziesemos 
yglesia, y porque desde que Entramos en aquella §ibdad de 
mex^ quando se dezia misa, haziamos vn altar sobre mesas 
y le tornavan a quitar, acordose q demandasemos a los ma- 
yordomos del gran montezuma, albafiires para que en nro 
aposento hiziesemos vna yglesia, y los mayordomos dixeron 
q se lo harian saber al montezuma, y nro capitan Enbio a 
dezirselo con dofia marina e aguilar y con orteguilla su paje, 
que entendia ya algo la lengua y luego dio li9en§ia, y man- 
do dar todo rrecavdo, E en dos dias teniamos nra yglesia 
hecha y la santa cruz puesta delante de los aposentos, E alii 
se dezia misa cada dia, hasta que se acabo el vino, que como 
cortes y otros capitanes y el frayle estuvieron malos quando 
las guerras de tascala, dieron priesa al vino que teniamos 
para misas, y desque se acabo, cada dia estavamos En la ygle- 
sia rrezando de rrodillas, delante del altar E ymagenes, lo 
vno por lo que heramos obligados a xpianos E buena cos- 
tunbre, y lo otro porque montezuma y todos sus capitanes 

Bernal Dlas del Castillo.— 39. 



298 

lo viesen y se ynclinasen a ello, y porq viesen el adorar e 
vernos de rrodillas delante de la cruz, especial quando ta- 
fiiamos El ave maria pues estando questavamos En aque- 
llos aposentos, como somos de tal calidad, y todo lo tras^en- 
demos E queremos saber quando rairavamos a donde mejor 
E mas convenible parte aviamos de hazer el altar, dos de nros 
soldados, que vno dellos hera carpintero, de lo bianco, que 
se dezia alonso yanes vio En vna pared como senal que avia 
sido puerta E estava jerrada y muy bien Encalada, E bru- 
fiida, y como avia fama, y teniamos rrelagion q En aquel 
aposento tenia montezuma el tesoro de su padre axayaca, 
sospechose questaria En aquella sala, questava de pocos dias 
§errada y encalada, y el yafiez lo dixo a juan velazquez de 
leon y a fran^^isco de lugo, que heran capitanes y avn deb- 
dos mios, y el alonso yanez se allegava En su con pan ia como 
criado, E aquellos capitanes se lo dixeron a cortes, y secre- 
tamente se abrio la puerta, y desque fue abierta y cortes con 
giertos capitanes Entraron primero dentro y vieron tanto 
numero dejoyas de oro, E en planchas y tejuelos muchos y 
piedras de chalchivis, y otras muy grandes rriquezas, queda- 
ron Enlevados y no supieron que dezir de tanta rriqueza y 
luego lo supimos Entre todos los demas capitanes y soldados 
y lo Entramos a ver muy secretamente y desque yo lo vi 
digo que me admire, E como En aquel tienpo hera man§ebo 
y no avia visto En my vida rriquezas como aquellas, tuve 
por §ierto, que en el mundo no se devieran aver otras tantas 
E acordose por todos nros capitanes e soldados, que ni por 
pensamiento se tocase En cosa ninguna dellas, sino que la 
misma puerta se tornase luego a poner sus piedras, y se qe- 
rase, y Encalose, de la manera que la hallamos, y que no se 
hablase En ello, porque no lo alcanQase a saber montezuma, 
hasta ver otro tienpo. — dexemos esto, desta rriqueza y di- 
gamos que como teniamos tan esfor9ados capitanes y solda- 
dos, y de muchos buenos consejos, y pare^eres, y primera- 
mente nro sefior Jesuxpo. ponia su divina mano En todas 
nras cosas, y ansi lo teniamos por 5ierto, apartaron a cortes 
En la yglesia quatro de nros capitanes, y juntamente doze 



^9 

soldados de quien el se fiava y comunicava e yo era vno de-. 
llos, y le diximos que mirase la rred y garlito donde Esta- 
vamos y la gran fortaleza de aquella §ibdad, y mirase las puen- 
tes y calgadas y las palabras y Avisos que por todos los pueblos 
por donde hemos venido, nos an dado, que avia aconsejado 
el vichilobos a montezuma que nos dexase Entrar en su Qib- 
dad, E que alii nos matarian y que mirase que los cora§ones 
de los honbres que son muy mudables, En espegial En los 
yndios, y que no tuviese confian5a de la buena voluntad y 
amor que montezuma nos muestra, porque de vna ora a otra 
ora, la mandaria, quando se le antojase darnos guerra, que 
eon quitarnos la comida, o El agua, o al^ar qualquiera puen- 
te que no nos podriamos valer, E que mire la gran multitud 
de yndios que tiene de guerra En su guarda, E que que po- 
driamos nosotros hazer para ofendellos, o para defendernos, 
porque todas las casas tienen En el agua, pues socorros de 
nros amigos los de tascala, por donde an de Entrar y pues Es 
cosa de ponderar todo esto que le deziamos, que luego sin 
mas dilation prendiesemos al montezuma, si queriamos ase- 
gurar nras vidas, y quejio se aguardase para otro dia, y que 
mirase que con todo el oro que nos dava motezuma ni el 
que aviamos visto en el tesoro de su padre axayaca ni eon 
quanta comida comiamos, que todo se nos hazia rrejalgar En 
el cuerpo, e que de noche ni de dia no dormiamos, ni rrepo- 
savamos con aqueste pensamiento, E que si otra cosa, algu- 
nos de nros soldados menos que Esto, que le dezian, sintie- 
sen, que serian como bestias, que no tenian sentido, que se 
Estan al dulgor del oro, no viendo la muerte al ojo, y des- 
questo oyo cortes, dixo, no creays cavalleros que duermo, ni 
estoy sin el mismo cuydado, que bien me lo abreys sentido, 
mas que poder tenemos nosotros para hazer tan grande atre- 
vimiento, prender A tan gran sefior. En sus mesmos pala- 
5ios, teniendo sus gentes de guarda y de guerra, que mane- 
ra o arte se puede tener. En querello poner por Efeto, q no 
apellide sus guerreros, y luego nos conbatan, y rreplicaron 
nros capitanes, que fue juan velazquez de leon, y diego de 
ordaz e g° de sandobal y pedro dalvarado, que con buenas 



doo 

palabras, sacalle de su sala y traello a nros aposentos, y de- 
zille que a de Estar preso que si se altera, o diere bozes, que 
lo pagara su persona y que si cortes no lo q«iere hazer lue- 
go, que les de ligengia. que Ellos lo pornan por la obra, y 
que de dos grandes peligros En questamos quel mejor y mas 
a proposito, es prendelle que no aguardar que nos diese gue- 
rra, que si la comengava, que rremedio podiamos tener, tan- 
bien le dixer5 §iertos soldados que nos paresyia, que los ma- 
yordomos de montezuma, que Servian En darnos bastimentos 
se desvergon§avan y no los trayan cunplidamente como los 
primeros dias, y tanbien dos yndios tascaltecas, nros amigos, 
dixeron secretamente A geronimo de aguilar, nra lengua, 
que no les pares§ia bien la voluntad de los mexicanos de dos 
dias atras, por manera, questuvimos platicando En este acuer- 
do, bien vn ora si le prenderiamos o no, y q manera ternia- 
mos y a nro capitan bien se le Encaxo este postrer consejo, y 
dexavamoslo para otro dia, que En todo caso le aviamos de 
prender, y avn toda la noche estuvimos rrogando a dios, que 
lo Encaminase para su santo servi§io, despues destas plati- 
cas, otro dia por la maiiana, vinieron dos yndios de tascala, 
y muy secretamente, con vnas cartas de la villa rrica, y lo 
que se contenia En ellas dezia, que juan descalante, que qdo 
por alguazil mayor, hera muerto, y seys soldados juntamen- 
te con el En vna batalla que le dieron los mexicanos y tan- 
bien le mataron el cavallo, y a muchos yndios totonaques 
que llebo En su conpania y que todos los pueblos de la sie- 
rra, y genpoal y su subjeto, estan alterados y no les quie- 
ren dar comida ni servir En la fortaleza, E que no saben que 
se hazer, y que como de antes los tenian por tevles, que ago- 
ra que an visto aquel desbarate, les hazen fieros, asi los toto- 
naques como los mexicanos, y que no les tienen En nada, 
ni saben que rremedio tomar, y desque oymos aquellas nue- 
bas, sabe dios quanto pesar tuvimos todos. aqueste fue el pri- 
mer desbarate que tuvimos En la nueva espana: miren los 
curiosos letores, la adversa fortuna como vuelve rrodando, 
quien nos vio Entrar En aquella (jibdad, Con tan solene rre- 
gebimiento, y trunfante, y nos t^niamos En posesion de rri- 



aoi 

coSy con lo que montezuma nos dava cada dia asi al capitati, 
como a nosotros, E aver visto la casa por mi memorada, lle- 
*na de oro y nos tenian por tevles, que son ydolos y que to- 
.das las batallas ven9iamos, E agora avernos venido tan gran 
desman, que no nos tuviesen En aquella rreputa§ion que de 
antes, sino por honbres, que podiamos ser ven§idos y aver 
sentido como se desvergongavan contra nosotros. En fin de 
mas rrazones, fue Acordado que aquel mesmo dia, de vna 
manera o de otra se prendiese montezuma, o morir todos 
sobrello, y porque para que vean los letores, de la manera 
que fue Esta batalla de ju^ descalante y como le mataron a 
el y los seys soldados y el cavallo, y los amigos totonaques 
que llebava consigo, lo quiero aqui declarar antes de la pri- 
sion de montezuma, por no quedalle atras, porq es men es- 
ter dallo bien A entender 



CAPITDLO XCIIII como fue la batalla que 
dieron los capitanes mexicanos a Juan des- 
calante, y como le mataron a el e al cava- 
llo y a seys soldados y A muchos amigos 
yndios totonaques, q tanbien alii murie- 
ro. — 

y es desta manera, que ya me abran oydo dezir, en el capitu- 
lo que dello habla, que quando estavamos En vn pueblo que 
se dize quiahuiztlan, que se juntaron muchos pueblos sus 
confederados, que heran amigos de los de 9enpoal, y por con- 
sejo y conboca5ion de nro capitan, que les atraxo a ello, qui- 
to que no diesen tributo a montezuma y se le rrevelaron y 
fueron mas de treynta pueblos En ello, y esto fue quando 
le prendimos sus rrecavdadores, segund otras vezes dho ten- 
go, en el capitulo que dello habla, y quando partimos de 9en- 
poal para venir a mx*'" quedo En la villa rrica por capitan 



302 

y alguazil mayor de la nueva espana, vn Juan descalante 
que hera persona de mucho ser, E amigo de cortes y le man- 
do que En todo lo que aquellos pueblos nros amigos oviesen 
menester, les faboresijiese, y pares§e ser que como el gran mon- 
tezuma tenia muchas guarni§iones, y capitanias de gente de 
guerra, En todas las provingias, que sienpre estavan junto a 
la rraya dellos, porque vna tenia En lo de soconusco por guar- 
da de lo de guatimala y chiapa, y otra tenia En lo de guaga- 
qualco y otra capitania En lo de mechuacan, y otra a la rra- 
ya de panuco, Entre tu§apan y vn pueblo que le pusimos por 
nonbre almeria, ques En la costa del norte, y como aquella 
guamigion, que tenia §erca de tu§apan, pare§io set deman- 
daron tributos de yndios E yndias y bastimento para sus gen- 
tes, a §iertos pueblos questavan alii §erca, o confinavan Con 
ellos, que heran amigos de§enpoal, y Servian al juan desca- 
lante, y a los vezinos que quedaron En la villa rrica, y en- 
tendian En hazer la fortaleza, y como les demandavan los 
mexicanos el tributo y servi9io dixeron que no se lo querian 
dar, porque malinche les mando que no lo diesen y quel gran 
montezuma lo a tenido por bien y los capitanes mexicanos 
rrespondieron que si no lo davan que los vernian a destruyr 
sus pueblos, y lleballos cativos, y que su sefior montezuma 
se lo avia mandado de poco tpo aca, y desque aquellas ame- 
nazas vieron nros amigos los totonaques, vinieron al capitan 
juan descalante, E quexanse rreziamente que los mexicanos 
les vienen A rrobar y destruyr sus tierras y desque El esca- 
lante lo entendio, Enbio mensageros a los mysmos mexica- 
nos para que no hiziesen Enojo ny rrobasen aquellos pue- 
blos, pues su sefior montezuma lo abia por bien, que somos 
todos grandes amigos, si no que yra contra ellos y les dara 
guerra. los mexicanos no hizieron caso de aquella rrespues- 
ta ni fieros y rrespondieron que En el canpo los hallaria, y 
el juan descalante que hera honbre muy bastante y de san- 
gre En el ojo, aper9ibio todos los pueblos, nros amigos de la 
sierra, que viniesen con sus armas, que heran arcos, flechas, 
lan§as, rrodelas, y ansi mismo apergibio los soldados mas 
sueltos y sanos que tenia, porque ya he dho otra vez, que to- 



dos los mas vezinos que quedavan En la villa rrica^ esta- 
van dolientes y honbres de la mar y con dos tiros y vn poco 
de poluora, y tres ballestas, y dos escopetas, y quarenta sol- 
dados y sobre dos mill yndios totonaques, fue a donde esta- 
van las guarni§iones de los mexicanos, que andavan ya 
rrobando vn pueblo de nros amigos, y en el canpo se Encon- 
traron al quarto del alva, y como los mexicanos heran do- 
blados que nros amigos los totonaques 6 como sienpre esta- 
van temorizados dellos En las guerras pasadas, a la primera 
rrefriega de flecha y varas y piedras y gritas huyeron y de- 
xaron al juan descalante peleando con los mexicanos, y de tal 
manera que llego con sus pobres soldados, hasta vh pueblo 
i . que llaman almeria, y le puso fuego, y le quemo las casas. 
alii rreposo vn poco, porque estava mal herido y En aquellas 
rrefriegas y guerra le llebaron vn soldado bivo, que se dezia 
arguello, que hera natural de leon, y tenia lacabe§amuy 
grande y la barva prieta y crespa, y hera muy rrebusto, de 
gesto y manjebo de muchas fuer^as, y le hirieron muy ma- 
j lamente, al escalante, y a otros seys soldados, y le mataron 

el caballo, y se boluio a la villa rrica y dende a tres dias mu- 
rio El y los soldados, y desta manera paso lo que dezimos 
de almeria, E no como lo Cuenta el coronista gomara, que 
I dize En su ystoria, que yba pedro diryio a poblar a panuco, 

I con 9iertos soldados. no se En que Entendimiento de vn tan 

I rretorico coronista Cabia que avia de Escrevir tal cosa, que 

I avnque con todos los soldados questavamos con cortes En me- 

xico no llegamos a quatrogientos y los mas heridos de las ba- 
tallas de tascala y tavasco que avn para bien velar no tenia- 
mos rrecavdo, quanto mas Enbiar a poblar a panuco, y dize 
que yba por capitan el pedro dir§io, y avn En aquel tienpo 
no hera capitan ni avn quadrillero, ni le daban cargo ni se 
acia cuenta del, y se quedo con nosotfos en mx^ tanbien di- 
ze el mismo coronista, otras muchas cosas sobre la prision 
del montezuma, yo no le Entiendo su escrevir E avia de mi- 
rar que quando lo escrevia, en su ystoria, que avia de aber 
bivos conquistadores de los de aquel tienpo que le dirian 
quando lo leyesen, esto no paso asi. En esotro dize lo que 



304 

quiere y dexallo E aqui, e bolvamos a nra materia, y dire co- 
mo los capitanes mexicanos, despues de dalle la batalla que 
dho tengo, al ju** descalante, se lo hizieron saber a monte- 
zuma, y avii le llevaron presentada la cabega del arguello, 
que pares§io ser murio En el camino de las heridas, que bi- 
vo le llebavan, y supimos quel montezuma, quando se la mos- 
traron, Como hera rrebust-a y grande, y tenia grandes bar- 
vas y crespas, ovo pavor y temyo de la ver, y mando que no 
la ofre§iesen a ningun Cu de mx^ sino En otros ydolos de 
otros pueblos, y pregunto el montezuma a sus capitanes, que 
siendo ellos muchos millares de guerreros, que como no ven- 
9ieron a tan pocos tevles, y rrespondieron, que no aprove- 
chavan nada sus varas y flechas ni buen pelear, que no los 
pudieron hazer rretraer porque vna gran tequeyihuata de 
castilla venia delante dellos y que aquella sefiora ponia a los 
mexicanos temor y dezia palabras a sus tevles que les esfor- 
gava, y el montezuma entonges creyo que Aquella gran se- 
fiora era santa maria y la que le aviamos dho que hera nra 
abogada que de antes dimos al montezuma, con su pregioso 
hijo En los bragos, y porque Esto yo no lo vi, porq estava en 
mexico, sino lo que dixeron giertos conquistadores que se 
hallaron En ello, y plugiese a dios que ansi fuese y gierta- 
tamente todos los soldados que pasamos con cortes, teuemos 
muy creydo, E ansi es verdad, y que la misericordia divina 
y nra senora la birgen maria sienpre hera con nosotros por 
lo qual le doy muchas gragias. y dexallo he aqui y dire lo 
que pasamos En la prision del gran montezuma. 



CAPITULO XCV. de la prision del gran 
montezuma, y lo que sobrello se hizo. 

como teniamos acordado el dia antes, de prender al monte- 
zuma, toda la noche estuvimos En oration rrogando a dios 
que fuese de tal manera, que rredundase para su santo servi- 
§10, y otro dia de maiiana fue acordado de la manera que avia 



805 

de ser. Uevo consigo cortes ^inco capitanes que fueron pe- 
dro de alvarado y gongalo de sandoval, juan velazquez de 
leon y fran§isco de lugo, y alonso de avila y a mi y con nras 
lenguas dona marina y Aguilar y todos nosotros, mando ques- 
tuviesemos muy a punto, y los de a cavallo, Ensillados y en- 
frenados. En lo de las armas no avia nesgesidad de ponello 
yo aqui por memoria, porque sienpre de dia y de noche, es- 
tamos armadoS; y cal9ado8 nros alpargates, que En aquella 
sazon hera nro cal^ado y quando soliamos yr a hablar al 
montezuma sienpre nos via armados de aquella manera y 
esto digo, puesto que cortes Con los que con el yvamos con 
todas sus armas pa le prender, no lo tenia el montezuma por 
cosa nueva, ni se alterava dello. ya puestos a punto todos 
Enbiole nro capitan a hazelle saber, como yva A su palagio, 
porque asi lo tenia por costunbre y no se alterase viendolo 
yr de sobresalto, y el montezuma bien Entendio poco mas o 
menos que yva Enojado por lo de almeria y le temia y man- 
do que fuese mucho En buen ora, y como Entro Cortes des- 
pues de le aver hecho sus acatos acostunbrados le dixo, con 
nras lenguas, senor montezuma, muy maravillado de voz es- 
toy q siendo tan valeroso prin§ipe y averse dado por nro ami- 
go, mandar a vros capitanes que teniades En la costa, gerca 
de tu^apan, que tomasen armas contra mis espanoles, y te- 
ner atrevimiento de rrobar los pueblos, questan En guarda 
y manparo de nro rrey y sefior y demandalles yndios E yn- 
dias para sacrificar y matar vn espanol, hermano mio, y vn 
cavallo, no le quiso dezir del capitan ni de los seys soldados 
que murieron luego que llegaron a la villa rrica, porquel 
montezuma no lo alcango a saber ni tanpoco lo supieron los 
yndios capitanes que les dieron la guerra y mas le dixo cor- 
tes, que teniendolo por tan su amigo mande a mis capitanes 
que En todo lo que posible fuese, os sirviesen y faboresgiesen, 
y v m por el contrario nos lo a hecho, E ansi mismo en lo de 
cholula, tuvieron vros capitanes con gran copia de guerre- 
ros, ordenado por vro mandado que nos matasen, Elo disi- 
mulado, lo de Ententes por lo mucho que os quiero, y ansi 
mismo agora vros vasallos y capitanes, se an desvergon§ado 

Bernal Diaz M Castillo.— iO* 



806 

y tienen platicas secretas, que nos quereys mandar matar, 
por estas cavsas no querria Encomen§ar guerra, ny destruyr 
aquesta gibdad conviene que para todo se Esousar, que lue- 
go callando y sin hazer ningun alboroto, se vaya con noso- 
tros a nro aposento, que alii sereys servido y mirado muy 
bien como En vra propia casa y que si alboroto o bozes da- 
va que luego seria muerto de aquestos mis capitanes que no 
los traigo para otro Efeto, y quando esto oyo el montezuma, 
estuvo muy espantado y sin sentido, y rrespondio que nunca 
tal mando que tomasen armas contra nosotros, y que Enbia- 
ria luego a llamar sus capitanes y se sabria la verdad y los 
castigaria y luego, en aquel estante, quito de su bra50 y mu- 
neca, El sello y sefial de vichilobos, que aquello hera quan* 
do mandava alguna cosa grave E de peso para que se cun- 
pliese e luego se Cunplia, y en lo de yr preso y salir de sus 
palagios contra su voluntad, que no hera persona la suya pa- 
ra que tal le mandase, E que no hera su voluntad salir y cor- 
tes le rreplico muy buenas rrazones y el montezuma le rres- 
pondia muy mejores y que no avia de salir de sus casas por 
manera questuvieron mas de media ora en estas platicas y 
desque juan velazquez de leon y los demas capitanes vieron 
que se detenia con el y no vian la ora de avello sacado de 
sus casas y tenelle preso hablaron a cortes algo alterados y 
dixeron que haze v m ya con tantas palabras o le llevamos 
preso, o dalle hemos destocadas, por eso, tornele a dezir, que 
si da bozes, o haze alboroto que le mataremos porque mas va- 
le que desta vez aseguremos nras vidas, o las perdamos, y co- 
mo el juan velazquez lo dezia con voz algo alto y espantosa, 
porque asi hera su hablar, y el montezuma vio a nros capi- 
tanes como Enojados, pregunto A dona marina que que de- 
zian Con aquellas palabras altas, y como la dofia marina era 
muy entendida, le dixo, senor montezuma, lo que yo os acon- 
sejo es, que vays luego con ellos a su aposento, sin rruydo 
ninguno, que yo se que os haran mucha honrra como gran 
sefior que soys, y de otra manera aqui quedareys muerto, 
y En su aposento se sabra la verdad. y entonges, el monte- 
zuma, dixo a cortes, sefior malinche ya que Eso quereys que 



sea, yo tengo vn hijo y dos hijas lexitimos, tomaldos en rre- 
henes, y a mi no me hagays esta afrenta, que diran mis prin- 
^ipales, si me viesen Uevar preso. torno a dezir cortes que su 
-persona avia de ir con ellos, y no avia de ser otra cosa, y En 
fin, de muchas mas razones que pasaron, dixo quel yria de 
buena voluntad, y enton§es cortes y nros capitanes, le hizie- 
ron muchas quirigias y le dixeron que le pedian por md que 
no oviese Enojo, y que dixese a sus capitanes y a los de su 
guarda que yva de su voluntad, porque avia tenido platica 
de su ydolo vichilobos, y de los papas que le Servian, que con- 
venia para su salud y guardar su vida, estar con nosotros y 
luego le truxeron sus rricas andas, En q solia salir con todos 
sus capitanes que le aconpaiiaron, fue a nro aposento, donde 
le pusimos guardas y velas, y todos quantos servigios y pla- 
zeres, que le podiamos hazer, ansi cortes como todos nosotros, 
tantos le haziamos, y no se le hecho prisiones ningunas, y 
luego le vinieron a ver todos los may ores pringipales mexica- 
nos y sus sobrinos a hablar con el, y a saber la cavsa de su 
prision, y si mandava que nos diesen guerra, y el montezu- 
ma les rrespondio, que El holgava de Estar algunos dias alii 
con nosotros de buena voluntad, y no por fuer§a, E que quan- 
do el algo quisiese que se lo diria, y que no se alborotasen 
ellos ni la §ibdad, ni tomasen pesar dello, porque aquesto que 
ha pasado, de estar alii, que su vichilobos lo tiene por bien, 
y se lo an dho §iertos papas que lo saben q hablaron con su 
ydolo sobrello. y desta manera que E dho fue la prision 
del gran monteyuma, y alii donde Estava tenia su servigio, 
y mugeres y vafios En que se vafiava, y sienpre a la con- 
tina Estavan En su conpafiia veynte grandes sefiores, y 
consejeros, y capitanes, y se hizo a estar preso sin mostrar 
pasion En ello, y alii venian con pleytos Enbajadores de 
lexos tierras y le trayan sus tributos, y despachava nego- 
gios de ynportan§ia. acuerdome que quando venian antel 
grandes caciques de lexos tierras, sobre terminos, o pueblos, 
o otras cosas de aquel arte que por muy gran senor que 
fuese, se quitava las mantas rricas, y se ponia otras de Ene- 
quen, y de poca valia y descal§o avia de venir, y quan- 



do llegava a los aposentos, no entrava derecho, sino por vn 
lado dellos, y quando pares^jia delante del gran montezu- 
ma, los ojos bajos, En tierra, y antes que a el llegasen le 
hazian tres rreveren§ias y le dezian, senor, mi senor, E mi 
gran senor, entonges le trayan pintado y dibujado el pleyto, 
o Enbara§o, sobre que venian, En vnos pafios y mantas de 
Enequen, y con vnas baritas muy delgadas y pulidas, le se- 
fialaban la cavsa del pleyto y estavan alii junto al monte^u- 
ma, dos honbres viejos, grandes ca§iques, y desque bien avian 
entendido el plej^to, aquellos juezes se lo dezian al monte^u- 
ma, la justi§ia que tenia con pocas palabras, los despachava, 
y mandava quien avia de Uebar las tierras o pueblos, y sin 
mas rreplicar en ello se salian los pleyteantes, sin boluer las 
espaldas y con las tres rreveren§ias se salian hasta la sala, y 
desque se vian fuera de su presenyia del montezuma, se po- 
nian otras mantas rricas, y se paseavan por mx*^ y dexare 
de dezir al presente desta prision, y digamos Com6 los men- 
sageros que Enbio el montezuma Con su serial y sello, a 11a- 
mar sus Capitanes que mataron nros soldados, vinieron an- 
tel presos y lo que con ellos hablo yo no lo se, mas que se 
los Enbio a cortes, para que hiziese justi§ia dellos y tomada 
su confision, sin estar el montezuma delante confesaron ser 
verdad lo atras ya por mi dho E que su senor se lo avia man- 
dado, que diesen guerra y cobrasen los tributos y que si al- 
gunos tevles fuesen En su defensa, que tanbien les diesen 
guerra, o matasen. E vista esta confision por cortes, Enbio- 
selo a hazer saber Al montezuma, Como le condenavan En 
aquella cosa, y el se desculpo quanto pudo, y nro Capitan le 

■Enbio a dezir quel ansi lo creya, que puesto que meresfia 
castigo conforme a lo que nro rrey manda, que la persona 
que manda matar a otros, sin culpa, o con culpa, que muera 
por ello, mas que le quiere tanto, y le desea todo bien, que 
ya que aquella culpa tuviese, que antes la pagaria el cortes 

• Dor su persona, que versela pasar Al montezuma y con todo 
esto que le Enbio a dezir, estava temeroso, y sin mas gastar 

' rrazones, cortes senten§io aquellos capitanes a muerte, E que 
fuesen quemados delante los palagios del montezuma, E an- 



809 

si se Esecuto luego la sentenfia y porque no oviese algun 
Enbarago, Entre tanto que se quemavan, mando hechar 
vnos grillos Al mismo monte^uma, y desque se los hecharon 
el hazia bramuras, y si de antes estava temerosO; Ententes 
estuvo mucho mas, y despues de quemados fue nro cortes 
con (inco de nros capitanes a su aposento y el mismo se los 
quito los grillos, y tales palabras le dixeron y tan amorosas, 
que se le paso luego El enojo, porque nro cortes le dixo, que 
no solamente le tenia por hermano, sino mucho mas, e 
que como Es sefior y rrey de tantos pueblos y provinyias, que 
si el podia, el tienpo andando, le haria que fuese sefior de 
mas tierras, de las que no ha podido conquistar, ni le obe- 
desfian, y que si quiere yr A sus pala^ios que le da l]9en9ia 
para ello, y deziaselo cortes con nras lenguas y quando se lo 
estava diziendo Cortes pares^ia se le saltavan las lagrimas de 
los ojos al montezuma, y rrespondio con gran cortesia, que 
se lo tenia en md, enpero bien entendio que todo era pala- 
bras las de cortes, E que agora al presente que convenia es- 
tar alii preso, porque por ventura, Como sus prin9ipales son 
muchos E sus sobrinos y parientes le vienen cada dia a de- 
zir que sera bien darnos guerra y sacallo de prision, que des- 
. que le vean fuera, que le atraeran a ello, E que no queria 
jt ver en su ^ibdad rrebueltas E que si no haze su voluntad, 
^ por ventura querran algar a otro sefior y que El les quitava 
.aquellos pensamientos, Con dezilles que su dios vichilobos 
se lo a Enbiado a dezir queste preso E a lo que Entendimos, 
e lo mas §ierto, cortes le avia dho a aguilar, que le dixese 
secreto, que avnque malinche le mandase salir de la prision, 
que los demas de nros capitanes y soldados no querriamos, 
y desque aquello lo oyo cortes le echo los bra§os Engima y 
le abra§o y dixo, no En balde sefior montezuma, os quiero 
tanto Como a mi mesmo, y luego el montezuma le demando 
a cortes vn paje espafiol que le servia que sabia ya la lengua, 
que se dezia orteguilla y fue harto provechoso, ansi para el 
montezuma como para nosotros, porque de aquel paje ynqui- 
ria y sabia muchas cosas de las de castilla El montezuma, y 
nosotros de lo que le dezian sus capitanes y verdaderamente 



ftio 

le hera tan buen servi§ial el paje, qufe lo queria mucho el 
montezuma dexemos de hablar de como estava ya el monte- 
zuma algo contento con los grandes alagos, y servigios, y 
conversa\;ion que con todos nosotros tenia porque sienpre que 
antel pasavamos y avnque fuese cortes le quitavamos los bo- 
netes de armas o caxcos, que sienpre Estavamos armados y 
el nos hazia gran mesura, y honrrava a todos, y digamos los 
nonbres de aquellos capitanes de montezuma, que se quema- 
ron por justiyia. El principal se dezia quetzalpopoca, y los 
otros se dezian El vno coate y el otro quiavit el otro no me 
acuerdo el nonbre que poco va En saber sus nonbres, y di- 
gamos que como este castigo se supo En todas las provingias 
de la nueva espafia, temieron y los pueblos de la costa, adonde 
mataron nros soldados boluieron a servir muy bien a los ve- 
zinos que quedavan En la villa rrica. E an de considerar los 
curiosos questo leyeren, tan grandes hechos que Entonges 
hizimos dar con los navios al traves, lo otro osar Entrar En 
tan fuerte gibdad, teniendo tantos Avisos que alii nos avian 
de matar desque dentro nos tuviesen, lo otro tener tanta osa- 
dia, osar prender al gran montezuma que hera rrey de aque- 
11a tierra, dentro En su gran §ibdad, y En sus mismos pala- 
§ios, teniendo tan gran numero de guerreros de su guarda, 
y lo otro osar quemar sus capitanes, delante sus palagios y 
hechalle grillos, entre tanto que se hazia la justiQia. muchas 
• vezes agora que soy viejo, me paro a considerar las cosas 
. Eroycas, que En aquel tienpo pasamos, que me pare§e las 
veo presentes, y digo que nros hechos, que no los haziamos 
. nosotros, sino que venian todos encaminados por dios, por- 
que que honbres avido En el mundo que osasen Entrar qua- 
tro§ientos soldados y, avn no llegavamos a ellos, En vna 
fuerte ^ibdad como es mex*^, ques mayor q venen§ia, estan- 
do apartados de nra castilla, sobre mas de mill y quinientas 
leguas, y prender a vn tan gran senor y hazer justi§ia de sus j 

capitanes delante del, porque ay mucho que ponderar En ! 

ello, y no ansi secamente Como yo lo digo. pasare adelante ! 

y dire como cortes despacho luego otro capitan, questuviese 
En la villa rrica Como estava el ju^ descalante q mataron. 



811 



CAPITULO XCVI. Como nro cortes Enbio 
a la villa rrica por teniente y capitan a vn 
hidalgo que se dezia Alonso de grado, en 
lugar del alguazil mayor juan descalante 
y el alguazilazgo mayor se lo dio a gon^a- 
lo de Sandoval, y desde Entoncjes fue al- 
guazil mayor y lo que sobrello paso dire 
adelante. 




ESPUES de fecha justi^ia de quetzalpopoca y sus ca- 
pitanes y amansado El gran montezuma, acordo 
nro capitan de Enbiar a la villa rrica por teniente 
della a vn soldado que se dezia alonso de grado, porque he- 
ra honbre muy Entendido y de buena platica, y presen;ia, 
y musico, E gran escrivano. este alonso de grado Era vno de 
los que sienpre fue contrario de nro cortes para que no fue- 
semos a mexico, y nos bolviesemos a la villa rrica, quando 
ovo En lo de tascala, ^iertos corrillos, ya por mi dhos En el 
capitulo q dello abla, y El alonso de grado era El que lo 
muyia, y si como hera de buenas gragias, fuera honbre de 
gueiTa, bien le ayudara todo junto, y esto digo porque quan- 
do nro cortes le dio El cargo, Como conos§ia su condition 
que no hera honbre de afrenta y cortes hera gra§iosoEn lo que 
dezia, le dixo, E aqui sefior alonso de grado, vros deseos cun- 
plidos, que yreys agora a la villa rrica, Como lo deseavades, 
y Entendereys En la fortaleza, y mira no vays a ninguna 
Entrada, como hizo juan descalante y os maten, y quando 
se lo estava diziendo, guinaba el ojo, porque lo viesemos los 
soldados que alii nos hallamos, E sintiesemos a que fin lo 



312 

dezia porque conos§ia del, que avpque se lo raandara con 
pena no fuera pues dadas las provisiones E ynstrugiones, de 
lo que avia de hazer El alonso de grado le suplico, que le hi- 
ziese md de la vara de alguazil mayor como la tenia El juan 
descalante que mataron los yndios, E oortes le dixo, que ya 
la avia dado A gongalo de sandoval, E que para el q no le 
faltaria, El tienpo andando, otro ofigio muy honrroso, E que 
se fuese con dios, y le Encargo que mirase por los vezinos E 
los honrrase y a los yndios amigos, no se les hiziese ningund 
agravio, ni se les tomase Cosa por fuerga, E que a dos herre- 
ros que En aquella villa quedavan y les avia Enbiado a de- 
zir y mandar que luego hiziesen dos cadenas gruesas del ye- 
rro y anclas, que sacaron de los navios que dimos al traves, 
que con brevedad las Enbiase y que diese priesa En la for- 
taleza, que se acabase de poner la madera e Cubrilla de teja, 
y como el alonso de grado llego a la villa mostro mucha gra- 
vedad Con los vezinos, y queria hazerse servir dellos, como 
gran sefior, y con los pueblos questavan de paz que fueron 
mas de treynta, Enbiava a les demandar joyas de oro, Eyn- 
dias hermosas, y en la fortaleza no se le dava nada para En- 
tender En ella. En lo que gslstava el tienpo hera. En bien 
comer y En jugar, y sobre todo esto que fue peor q lo pasa- 
do, secretamente convocava A sus amigos, e a los que no lo 
Eran para que si viniese aquella trra diego velazquez de Cu- 
ba o qulquier su capitan, de dalle la tierra, E hazerse Con 
el, todo lo qual muy en posta, se lo hizieron saber por cartas 
a cortes a mexico, y como lo supo ovo Enojo consigo mis- 
mo, por aver Enviado al grado, Cono^iendole sus malas en- 
trafias e condition danada, y como tenia sienpre en el pen- 
samiento que diego velazquez, governador de cuba, por vna 
parte o por otra avia de alcangar a saber como aviamos En- 
biado nros procuradores a su magestad e que no le acudiria- 
mos a cosa ninguna, E que por ventura Enbiaria armada y 
capitanes contra nosotros, pares^iole, que seria bien poner 
honbre de quien fiar el puerto e la villa, y enbio a gon9alo 
de sandoval que ya hera alguazil mayor por muerte del juan 
descalante y llebo En su conpania a pedro de yr§io, aquel 



813 

de quien Cuenta el coronista gomara, que yva a poblar a 
panuco, y EntoAges el pedro de yr^io fue a la villa y tomo 
tanta amistad gon§alo de sandoval, con el porquel pedro "de 
yrgio como avia sido criado En la casa del conde de vrena 
y de don pedro giron sienpre contava lo que les avia acon- 
tes9ido, y como El gonsalo de sandoval Era de buena volun- 
tad y no nada mali9io8o y le Contava aqllos Cuentos que le 
conplazian, tomo amistad con el, como dho tengo, y sienpre 
le hizo subir hasta ser capitan, y si En este tienpo de agora 
fuera, algunas palabras q no eran de dezir, dezia El pedro 
de yr5io, En lugar de gra^ias, que se las rreprehendia harto, 
gon9alo de sandoval, le castigarian por ellas, por el santo 
ofigio. dexemos de contar vidas agenas, y bolvamos a gonga- 
lo de sandoval, que llego a la villa rrica y luego Enbio pre- 
so a mex*^ con yndios que lo guardasen al alonso de grado, 
porque ansi se lo mando cortes, y todos los vezinos querian 
mucho al gon^alo de sandoval, porque a los que alio ques- 
tavan dolientes, el les proveya lo mejor que podia, y les mos- 
trava mucho amor, y a los pueblos de paz, tenia En mucha 
justi5ia, y les fabores^ia En todo lo que podia, y en la forta- 
leza comen^o a enmaderar e tejar y hazia todas las.cosas co- 
mo convienen hazer, todo lo que los buenos capitanes son 
obligados a azer, y fue harto provechoso a cortes y a todos 
nosotros Como adelante veran en su tpo e sazon. dexemos al 
sandoval En la villa rrica, y bolvamos al alonso de grado, 
que llego preso a mx^, y queria yr a hablar a cortes, y no le 
consintio, que paresgiese delante del, antes lo mando hechar 
preso en vn ^epo de madera, que entonges hizieron nueva- 
mente. acuerdome que olia la madera de aquel §epo, Como 
a sabor de axos o gebollas, y estuvo preso dos dias E como el 
alonso de grado, Era muy platico y honbre de muchos me- 
dios, hizo grandes ofregimientos a cortes, que le seria muy 
servidor y en todo le seria leal y tantas muestras de desealle 
servir, le hizo, que le Convengio, y luego le solto y avn des- 
de alii adelante vi, que sienpre privava con cortes, mas no 
para que le diese cargos de Cosas de guerra, sino Conforme 
a su condigion, y avn el tienpo andando le dio la contadu- 

Barnal Dlai del CMtlllo.— 41. 



814 

ria, que solia tener alonso davila, porque en aquel tienpo 
Enbio al mismo alonso de avila, a la ysla de santo domin- 
go por procurador, segun adelante dire, en su coyuntura. no 
quiero dexar de traer aqui a la memoria, como quando cor- 
tes Enbio a gongalo de sandoval, a la villa rrica, por tenien- 
te y capitan y alguazil mayor, le mando, que asi Como lle- 
gase, le enbiase dos herreros, con todos sus aparejos de fuelles 
y herramientas y mucho hierro de lo de los navios que di- 
mos al traves y las dos cadenas grandes de hierro que estavan 
ya hechas, y que Enbiase belas y xargias, y pez y eatopa, y 
vna aguja de marear y todo otro cualquier aparejo para ha- 
zer dos vergantines para andar En la laguna de mexico, lo 
qual luego se lo Enbio el sandoval muy cunplidamente se- 
gun y de la manera que lo mando. 



CAPITULO XCVII. Como estando el gran 
montezuma preso, sienpre cortes y todos 
nros soldados le festejamos y rregocjijamos, 
y avn se le dio lijen(jia para yr a ca^a, e 
fue esta li5* pa vi su ynten^ion. 




OMO nro capitan En todo hera muy diligente y vi- 
do quel montezuma estava preso, y por temor no 
se congojase con estar Engerrado y detenido, pro- 
curava cada dia, despues de aver rrezado, que Enton^es no 
teniamos vino para dezir misa, de ylle a tener palagio, E 
yvan con el cuatro capitanes, Espegialmente pedro de alva- 
rado y juan velazquez de leon y diego de ordas, y pregunta- 
van al montezuma con mucho acato, que que tal estava, y 
que mirase lo que manda que todo se haria, y que no tuviese 
congoja de su prision, y El rrespondia, que antes se holgava 



ftl6 

destar preso, y Esto porque nros dioses no8 davan poder pa- 
ra ello, o su vichilobos lo permitia y de platica En platica le 
dieron a entender miis por estenso las cosas de nra santa fee, 
y El gran poder del enperador nro sefior y avn algunas vezes 
jugava el monte§uma con cortes, al totoloque, ques vn jue- 
go que Ellos ansi le llaman, con vnos bodoquillos chicos muy 
lisos que tenian hechos de oro para aquel juego, y tiravan con 
los bodoquillos algo lejos, y vnos tejuelos que tanbien Eran 
de oro, E a ginco rrayas ganavan o perdian giertas piegas E 
joyas rricas que ponian. acuerdome que tanteava a cortes pe- 
dro de alvarado E al gran montezuma vn sobrino suyo, gran 
sefior, y el pedro de alvarado, sienpre tanteava vna rraya de 
mas, de las que avia cortes, y el montezuma como lo bio de- 
zia, C9n gra§ia y rrisa, que no queria que le tan tease a cortes 
El tonatio, que ansi llamavan al pedro de alvarado, porque 
hazia mucho yxoxol En lo q tanteava, que quiere dezir En 
su lengua, q mentya, que Echava sienpre vna rraya de mas, 
y cortes y todos nosotros los soldados, que En aquella sazon 
haziamos guarda, no podiamos estar de rrisa por lo que dixo 
el gran montezuma. diran agora q por q nos rreymos de aque- 
lla palabra, es porq el p** dalvarado, puesto q era de gentil 
Cuerpo e bu* manera, era bigioso en el ablar demasyado y 
como le conogimos su codigion por esto nos rreymos tanto, 
e bolvamos al juego, y si ganava cortes davan las joyas aque- 
Uos sus sobrinos y privados del montezuma, que le Servian, 
y si ganava montezuma, nos lo rrepartia a los soldados que 
le haziamos guarda, y avn no por lo que nos dava del juego 
dexava cada dia de darnos presentes de oro y rropa, ansi a 
nosotros Como al capitan de la guarda, que Entonyes Era 
Juan Velazquez de leon, y en todo se mostrava ser amigo e 
servidor de montezuma, y tanbien me acuerdo, que Era de 
la vela, vn soldado muy alto de cuerpo, y blen dispuesto 
y de muy grandes fuergas que se dezia hulano de truxillo, y 
hera honbre de la mar, y quando le cabia el quarto de noche 
de la vela. Era tan mal mirado, que hablando aqui con aca- 
to de los sefiores leyentes hazia cosas desonestas que lo oyo el 
montezuma, e como Era vn rrey destas trras tan valeroso, tu- 



m 

volo a mala crian5a y desacato que en parte que el lo oyese, 
se hiziese tal cosa y sin miramiento de su psona y pregunto 
a su paje orteguilla, que quien Era aquel malcriado e su^io, 
y dixo que Era honbre que solia andar En la mar y que no 
sabe de puli^ia, e bu* crian§a, y tanbien le dio a entender de 
la calidad de cada vno de los soldados que alii estavamos, 
qual Era cavallero, o qual no, y le dezia a la contina mu- 
chas cosas quel montezuma deseava saber bolvamos a nro sol- 
dado truxillo, que desque fue de dia, montezuma lo mando 
Uamar y le dixo que por que Era de aquella condition, que 
sin tener miramiento a su persona, no tenia Aquel acato de- 
vido, que le rrogava que otra vez no lo hiziese y mandole 
dar vna joya de oro, que pesava yinco pesos, y el truxillo no 
se le dio nada por lo que le dixo, y otra noche adrede Cre- 
yendo que le daria otra cosa, y el montezuma lo hizo saber 
ajuan velazquez Capitan de la guarda, y mando luego el 
Capitan quitar al truxillo que no velase mas y con palabras 
asperas lo rreprehendieron. tanbien acaesjio que otro solda- 
do, que se dezia pero lopez gran vallestero, y hera honbre 
que no se le Entendia mucho, y hera bien dispuesto, y vela- 
va al montezuma, y sobre si Era ora de tomar el quarto, o 
no, de noche tuvo palabras Con vn quadrillero, y dixo, o pe- 
sia tal. Con este perro, que por velalle a la contina, estoy 
muy malo del estomago, para me morir, y el montezuma oyo 
aquella palabra, y pesole En el alma, y quando vino Cortes 
a tenelle pala^io, lo alcango a saber, y tomo tanto Enojo de- 
lio, que al pero lopez, con ser muy buen soldado, le mando 
agotar dentro En nros aposentos, y desde alii adelante, to- 
dos los soldados a quien cabia la vela, con mucho silen^io y 
crianja Estava belando puesto que no avia menester man- 
dallo a muchos de nosotros que le velavamos sobre Este buen 
comedimiento que con aqueste gran cacique aviamos de te- 
ner y el bien conosgia a todos, y sabia nros nonbres y avn 
calidades y Era tan bueno, que a todos nos dava joyas, a otros 
mantas, E yndias hermosas. Como En aquel tienpo yo Era 
mangebo, y sienpre questava En su guarda, o pasava delan- 
te del con muy gran acato le quitava mi bonete de armas, y 



di7 

avn le abian dho el paje ortega que vine dos vezes a descu- 
brir esta nueva espaiia, primero que Cortes, y yo le avia abla- 
do al orteguilla que le queria demandar a montezuma que 
me hiziese md de vna yndia muy hermosa, y como lo supo 
el montezuma me mando llamar, E me dixo, bernal diaz del 
Cast** anme dho que teneys motolinea de rropa y oro, y os 
mandare dar oy vna buena mo^a, tratalda muy bien ques 
hija de honbre prin§ipal, y tanbien os daran oro y mantas 
yo le rrespondi, Con mucho acato que le besava las manos 
por tan gran md, y que dios nro sefior le prosperase, y pa- 
resge ser pregunto al paje que que avia rrespondido y le de- 
claro la rrespuesta, y dizque le dixo el montezuma, de noble 
condigion me pareQe bernal diaz, porque a todos nos sabia 
los nonbres, como dho tengo, e me mado dar tres tejuelos de 
oro, e dos cargas de mantas. dexemos de hablar desto y di- 
gamos como por la mafiana desque hazia sus orasiones y sa- 
crifigios a los ydolos o almorzava, poca cosa, e no era carne 
sino axi, estava Enpachado vna ora En oyr pleytos de mu- 
chas partes de cagiques que a el venian de lejos tierras ya E 
dicho otra vez, En el capitulo que dello habla, de la manera 
que Entravan a negogiar y el acato que le tenian, y como 
sienpre Estavan En su conpafiia. En aquel tpo para despa- 
char negogios veynte honbres anjianos que Eran sus juezes, y 
porquesta ya memorado, no lo tornare a regitar y entonges 
alcangamos a saber, que las muchas mugeres que. tenia por 
amigas, casava dellas con sus capitanes, o personas pringipa- 
les muy privados, y avn dellas dio a nros soldados, y la que 
me dio a mi Era vna sefiora dellas, e bien se paregio en ella 
q se dixo dofia fran**, y ansi se pasava la vida, vnas vezes 
rriendo, y otras vezes pensando En su prision. quiero aqui 
dezir puesto que no vaya a proposito de nra rrelagion, por- 
que me lo ban preguntado algunas personas curiosas, que 
por que solamente el soldado por mi nonbrado llamo perro 
al montezuma, avn no En su presengia le mando Cortes ago- 
tar, siendo tan pocos soldados como Eramos y que los yndios 
tuviesen notigia dello, y esto digo que En aquel tienpo, todos 
nosotros y avn el mysmo cortes quando paravamos delante 



del gran montezuma, le haziamos rreveren§ia con los bone- 
tes de armas que sienpre trayamos quitados, y el Era tan bue- 
no y tan bien mirado, que a todos nos hazia mucha honrra 
que dejnas de ser rrey desta nueva espafia, su persona y con- 
dition lo mere§ia, y demas de todo esto, si bien se considera 
la cosa En questavan nras vidas, sino solamehte mandar a 
sus vasallos le sacasen de la prision y darnos luego guerra que 
En ver su presengia y rreal franqueza, E como viamos que te- 
nia a la contina Consigo muchos sefiores que le aconpafiavan 
y venian de lexos tierras, otros muchos mas sefiores y del 
gran pala5io que le hazian, y el gran numero de gente que a | 

la contina dava de comer y bever ny mas ny menos que quan- 
do estava sin prision, y todo esto considerado, cortes ovo mu- 
cho Enojo desque lo supo, que tal palabra le dixese y como 
estava ayrado dello, de rrepente le mando castigar como dho 
tengo y fue bien Enpleado En el. pasemos adelante y diga- 
mos que En aquel ynstante llegaron de la villa rrica yndios i 

cargados con las dos cadenas de yerro gruesas, que cortes | 

avia mandado hazer a los herreros, tanbien truxeron todas I 

las cosas pertenes^ientes para los vergantines, como dho ten- 
go, y ansi como fue traydo, se lo hizo saber al gran monte- 
zuma y dexallo E aqui y dire lo que sobrello paso 



CAPITULO XCVIII. como Cortes mando 
hazer dos vergantines de mucho sosten E 
veleros para andar en la laguna, y como 
el gran montezuma dixo a Cortes que le 
diese liQcnqia para yr a hazer oraijion a 
sus tenplos, y lo que ( 'ortes le dixo y co- 
mo le dio la liQen^ia — 

pues Como ovo llegado todo El aparejo para hazer los ver- 
gantines, luego cortes se lo fue a hazer saber al gran monte- 



819 

zuma que queria hazer dos navios chicos para se andar hol- 
gando En la laguna, que mandase a sus Carpinteros que 
fuesen a cortar la madera, y que yrian con nros maestros de 
hazer navios, que se dezian martin lopez, y vn andres nu- 
fiez, y como la madera de rroble estava obra de quatro leguas 
de alii, de presto fue trayda y dado el galico della y como 
avia muchos carpinteros de los yndios, fueron de presto 
hechos y calafateados y breados, y puesto sus xaryias y velas, 
a su tamafio y medida y vna tolda a cada vno, y salieron tan 
buenos y veleros, como si estuvieran vn mes En tomar los 
galicos, porque el martin lopez. Era muy estremado maestro 
y este fue El que hizo los treze vergantines para ayuda a ga- 
nar a mx*^ como adelante dire, y fue vn buen soldado para 
la guerra. dexemos aparte esto y dire como el montezuma, 
dixo a cortes que queria salir e yr a sus tenplos a hazer sa- 
crifi§io8, y cunplir sus devoyiones para lo que a sus dieses 
era obligado, como para que Conozcan sus capitanes y prin- 
§ipales, Especial giertos sobrinos suyos que cada dia le vienen 
a dezir le quieren soltar y darnos guerra y quel les da por 
rrespuesta, quel se huelga destar con nosotros porque crea 
ques como se lo a dho e se lo a mandado su dios vichilobos, 
como ya otra vez se lo a hecho creer. y quanto a la li§en5ia 
que le demandava, cortes le dixo, que mirase, que no hizie- 
se Cosa con que perdiese la vida, y que para ver si avia al- 
gun descomedimiento, o mandava a sus Capitanes, o papas, 
que le soltasen, o nos diesen guerra, que para aquel Efeto, 
Enbiava capitanes E soldados, para que luego le matasen a 
estocadas. En sintiendo alguna novedad de su persona, E que 
vaya mucho en buen ora, y que no sacrificase ningunas per- 
sonas que Era gran pecado contra nro dios verdadero, ques 
el que le Emos pedricado, y que alii estavan nros altares y 
la ymagen de nra sefiora, ante quien podria hazer oragion 
y el montezuma dixo q no sacrificaria anima ninguna E 
fue en sus rricas andas muy aconpanado de grandes ca§iques. 
Con gran ponpa, como solia, y llevava delante sus ynsinias, 
que Era como vara o baston, que Era la senal que yva alii 
su persona rreal como hazen a los visorreyes desta nueva es- 



320 

pafia, y con el y van para guardalle, quatro de nros capitanes 
que sedezianjvan velazquez de leon, y pedro de alvara- 
do, y alonso de avila, y franjisco de lugo, con ^iento y gin- 
quenta soldados, y tanbien yva con nosotros el padre de la 
md para le rretraer el sacrifi^io, si le hiziese de honbres, e 
yendo Como y vamos al Cu del vichilobos, ya que Uegava- 
mos 9erca del maldito tenplo, mando que le sacasen de las 
andas, y fue arrimado a onbros de sus sobrinos, y de otros 
Cagiques, hasta que llego al tenplo. ya E dho otras vezes, 
que por las calles por donde yva su persona, todos los prin- 
gipales avian de llebar los ojos puestos en el suelo, y no le 
miravan a la cara y llegado a las gradas de lo alto del ado- 
ratorio estavan muchos papas aguardandole para le ayudar 
a subir de los brayos, E ya le tenian sacrificado de la noche 
antes quatro yndios y por mas que nro capitan le dezia, y 
se lo rretraya el frayle de la md, no aprovechava cosa nin- 
guna, sino que avia de matar honbres, y muchachos, para 
hazer su sacrifi9io, y no podiamos En aquella sazon hazer 
otra cosa sino disimular con el, porquestava muy rrebuelto 
mex®° y otras grandes gibdades, Con los sobrinos del monte- 
zuma, como adelante dire, y desque ovo hecho sus sacrificjios 
porq no tardo mucho en azellos, noa bolvimos Con el a nros 
aposentos y estava muy alegre, y a los soldados que con el 
fuymos, luego nos hizo md de joyas de oro. dexemoslo aqui, 
y dire lo que mas paso — 



821 



CAPITULO XCIX como Echamos los dos 
vergantines al agua y como el gran mon- 
tezuma dixo que queria yr a caqa y fue En 
los vergantines hasta vn penol donde avia 
muchos benados y ca^a, que no Entrava a 
caqar en el persona ninguna, con grave 
pena — 

desque los dos vergantines fueron acabados de hazer, y Echa- 
dos al agua, y puestos y adere§ados todas sus xargias y mas- 
teles, con sus vanderas rreales e ynperiales y apergibidos 
honbres de la mar para los marear, fueron En ellos al rremo 
y a vela, y heran muy buenos veleros, y como montezuma 
lo supo dixo a cortes que queria yr A caga En la laguna a 
vn penol questava acotado, que no osavan Entrar En el A 
montear, por muy pringipal que fuese so pena de muerte, y 
cortes le dixo que fuese mucho En buen ora, y que mirase lo 
que de antes le avia dho, quando fue a sus ydolos q no era 
mas su bida de rrebolver alguna cosa, y que En aquellos ver- 
gantines yria, que era mejor navega§ion yr En ellos que En 
sus canoas y piraguas, por grandes que sean, y el montezu- 
ma se holgo de yr En el vergantin mas velero, y metio Con- 
sigo muchos senores y pringipales, y en el otro vergantin fue 
lleno de Cagiques y vn hijo del montezuma, y apergibio sus 
monteros, que fuesen En canoas y piraguas, cortes mando a 
juan Velazquez de leon, que Era capitan de la guarda, y a pe- 
dro de albarado y a xpoual de oli, fuesen con el y alonso de 
avila, con dozientos soldados, que llevasen gran adbertengia, 
del cargo, q les dava y mirasen por el gran montezuma, y 
como todos estos capitanes, que he nonbrado Eran de sangre 
En el ojo, metieron todos los soldados que E dho, y quatro 
tiros de bronze con toda la polvora que avia, con nros arti- 

Bemal DIiue del CastlUo.— 42. 



822 

lleros que se dezian mesa y arvenga y se hizo vn toldo muy 
Enparamentado, segun el tienpo, y alii Entro montezuma 
con sus pringipales, y como En aquella sazon hizo el viento 
muy fresco, y los marineros se holgavan de contentar y 
agradar al montezuma, mareavan las velas de arte que y van 
bolando y las canoas En que y van siis monteros y prin^ipa- 
les quedavanse atras por muchos rremeros que llebavan. 
holgavase el montezuma y dezia que Era gran maestria lo 
de las velas y rremos todo junto, y Uego al pefiol que no hera 
muy lexos y mato toda la caQa que quiso de benados y lie- 
bres y conexos, y boluio muy contento a la gibdad, y quan- 
do llegavamos gerca de mx~ mando pedro de alvarado y Juan 
Velazquez de leon, y los demas capitanes que disparasen el 
artilleria, de que se holgo mucho montezuma, que como le 
viamos tan franco y bueno le teniamos En el acato que se 
tienen los rreyes destas partes, y el nos hazia lo mismo. y si 
oviese de contar las cosas y condition quel tenia de gran se- 
fior, y el acato y servigio que todos los sefiores de la nueva 
espafla y de otras provingias le hazian, es para nunca Acabar 
porque Cosa ninguna que mandava q le truxesen, y avn que 
fuese bolando, que luego no le hera traydo, y esto digolo 
porque vn dia estavamos tres de nros capitanes y giertos sol- 
dados con el gran montezuma, y acaso abatiose vn gavilan 
en vnas salas como corredores, por vna codorniz que yerca 
de las casas y palagios donde Estava preso el montezuma, 
estavan vnas palomas, y codornizes mansas porque por gran- 
deza las tenia alii para criar, el yndio mayordomo q tenia 
cargo de barrer los Aposentos, y como el gavilan se abatio y 
llebo presa, vieronlo nros capitanes y dixo vno dellos, que 
se dezia frangisco de Savzedo el polido que fue maestre-sa- 
la del almirante de castilla, o que Undo gavilan y que presa 
hizo y tan buen buelo tiene y rrespondimos los demas sol- 
dados que Era muy bueno, y que avia En estas tierras mu- 
chas buenas aves de caga, de bolanteria y el montezuma es- 
tuvo mirando En lo que hablavamos y pregunto a su paje 
orteguilla sobre la platica y le rrespondio, que deziamos 
aquellos capitanes quel gavilan que Entro a cagar Era muy 



bueno, E'q si tuviesemos otros como aquel, que le mostrarian 
a venir a la mano y que en el canpo le hecharian a qual- 
quiera ave., avnque fuese algo grande y la mataria. Enton- 
ges, el montezuma dixo pues yo mandare agora q tomen aql 
mesmo gavilan, y veremos si le amansan y ca§an con el, to- 
dos nosotros, los que alii nos hallamos, le quitamos las go- 
rras de armas por la md, y luego mando llamar sus ca§ado- 
res de bolateria y les dixo que le truxesen el mesmo gavilan, 
y tal mafia se dieron En le tomar, que a oras del ave maria 
bienen con el mismo gavilan y le dieron a fran** de savzedo 
y le mostro al senuelo, y porque luego se nos ofres9ieron 
otras cosas En que yvan mas que la caga, se dexara aqui de 
hablar En ello. y elo dho porque Era tan gran prin5ipe, que 
no solaraente le trayan tributos de todas las mas partes de 
la nueva espafia, y senoreaba tantas tierras, y En todas bien 
obedcQido que avn estando preso sus vasallos tenblavan del 
q hasta las aves que buelan por el ayre hazia tomar. de- 
xemos esto aparte y digamos como la adversa fortuna, buel- 
ve den quando En quando, su rrueda. En aqueste tienpo 
tenian convocado Entre los sobrinos y debdos del gran mon- 
tezuma, a otros muchos ca§iques y a toda la tierra para dar- 
nos guerra, y soltar al montezuma, y al^arse algunos dellos 
por rreyes de mx*^, lo qual dire adelante. 



CAPITULO XCIX [0] Como los sobrinos 
del gran montezuma andavan conbocando 
e atrayendo a si las voluntades de otros 
senores para venir a mexico y sacar de la 
prision al gran montezuma y Echarnos de 
la (jibdad y matarnos. 

desque el cacamatzin, seilor de la ^ibdad de tezcuco, ques 
despues de mexico la mayor y mas principal yibdad que ay 



S24 

En la nueva espafia, y Entendio que avia muchos dias ques- 
tava preso su tio montezuma, E que En todo lo que nosotros 
podiamos, nos y vamos senoreando, y avn alcanyo a saber que 
aviamos abierto la casa adonde estava el gran tesoro de su 
aguelo axayaCa, y que no aviamos tornado cosa ninguna de- 
llo, E antes que lo toraasemos, aeordo de conbocar a todos 
los senores de tezcuco sus vasallos E al sefior de Cuyuacan 
que Era su primo y sobrino del montezuma E al senor de 
tacuba, E al senor de iztapalapa, E a otro Ca§iq muy gran- 
de sefior de matalyingo, q Era pariente muy gercano del 
montezuma, y avn dezian que le venia de derecho El rrey- 
no y sefiorio de mx*^, y este Ca§iq Era muy valiente per 
su persona Entre los yndios, pues andando Con^jertando con 
ellos, E con otros senores mexicanos, que para en tal dia vi- 
niesen Con todos sus poderes y nos diesen guerra, pares^e 
ser que al ca§ique que E dho que Era valiente por su per- 
sona que no le se el nonbre, dixo que si le davan a el, el se- 
fiorio de mx°®, pues le venia de derecho, quel Con toda su 
parentela, y de vna provin§ia que se dize matalzingo, serian 
los primeros que vernian Con sus armas, a nos Echar de 
mx*^, o no quedaria ninguno de nosotros a vida, y el caca- 
matzin, segun pares^io, rrespondio, que a el le venia El ca- 
§icazgo, y el avia de ser rrey, pues Era sobrino del montezu- 
ma, E que si no queria venir, que sin el, y su gente aria la 
guerra, por maneraque ya tenia el Cacamatzin apergebidos 
los pueblos E sefiores por mi nonbrados, y tenia ya con9er- 
tado, que para tal dia viniese sobre mexico, E con los senores 
que dentro estavan de su parte les darian lugar a la entra- 
da. E andando en estos tratos, lo supo muy bien el mon- 
tezuma, por la parte de su gran debdo, que no quiso Con§e- 
der en lo q Camatzin qria, y para mejor lo saber, enbio 
montezuma a llamar todos sus cagiques y pringipales de 
aquella gibdad, y le dixeron como el cacamatzin los andava 
conbocando todos con palabras o dadivas para que le ayuda- 
sen a darnos guerras, y soltar al tio, y como el montezuma 
Era cuerdo y no queria ver su yibdad puesta en armas ni 
alborotos, se lo dixoacortes, segun y de la manera que pa- 



826 

sava, el qual alboroto, muy bien sabia nro Capitan y todos 
nosotros mas no por tan entero Como se lo dixo, y el con- 
sejo que sobrello se tomo Era que nos diese de su gente me- 
xicana, E yriamos sobre tezcucu, y que le prenderiamos o 
destruyriamos aquella gibdad e sus comarcas, E al montezu- 
ma no le quadro este consejo, por manera q Cortes le enbio 
a dezir al cacamatzin que se quitase de andar rreboluiendo 
guerraque sera cavsa de su perdition y que le qui ere tener 
por amigo y que en todo lo que oviese menester de su perso- 
na lo ara por el, E otros muchos cunplimientos, y como el 
cacamatzin Era mangebo y alio otros muchos de su paresger, 
que le acudirian En la guerra, Enbio a dezir a cortes que ya 
avia entendido sus palabras de alagos, que no las queria mas 
oyr, sino' quando le viese venir, q entonges le hablaria lo que 
quisiese. torno otra vez cortes a le Enbiar a dezir que mira- 
se que no hiziese deservi§io a nro rrey y sefior, q lo pagaria 
en su persona y le quitaria la vida por ello, y rrespondio que 
ni Cono§ia a rrey ni quisiera aver conofido a cortes, que con 
palabras blandas prendio a su tio. desq Enbio aquella rres- 
puesta nro Capitan rrogo al monteguma, pues Era tan gran 
senor y dentro En tezcuco tenia grandes Ca9iques y parien- 
tes por capitanes, y no estavan bien Con el cacamatzin, por 
ser muy sobervio, y malquisto, y pues alii En mx® * con el 
montezuma estava vn hermano del mismo cacamatzin man- 
gebo de buena disposition, questava huydo del propio her- 
mano, porque no le matase, que despues del cacamatzin, Ere- 
dava el rreyno de tezcuco, que tuviese manera y congierto 
con todos los de tezCuco, que prendiesen al cacamatzin, o 
que secretamente le Enbiase a llamar y que si viniese, que 
le hechasen mano y le tuviese en su poder hasta questuvie- 
se mas sosegado, y que pues que aquel su sobrino estava 
En su casa y le sirve, que le al§e luego por senor y le 
quite el senorio al cacamatzin, questa En su deservi§io 
y anda rrebolviiBndo todas las 9ibdades y ca§iques de la trra 
por senorear su gibdad e reyno. y el montezuma dixo que 
le enbiaria luego a llamar, mas que sentia del que no querria 
venir y que si no viniese que se ternia Congierto con sus ca- 



pitanes y parientea, que le prendan, y cortes le dio muchas 
gra^ias por ello, y avn le dixo, senor montezuma, bien po- 
deys creer que si os quereys yr a vros pala5io8, que en vra ma- 
no esta, que desde que tengo Entendido que me teneys buena 
voluntad, yo os quiero tanto, que no fuera yo de tal condi- 
gion que luego no os fuera aconpafiando, para que os fue- 
rades, con toda vra cavalleria, a vros palagios, y si lo E de- 
xado de hazer es por estos mis capitanes, que os fueron a 
prender porque no quieren que os suelte, E porq v m dize q 
quiere estar preso, por escusar las rrebueltas, q vros sobrinos 
traen por aver en su poder esta vra §ibdad, e quitaros el man- 
do, y el montezuma dixo q se lo tenia En md, y como yba 
entendiendo las palabras alaguefLas de cortes E via que lo 
dezia no para soltalle sino para probar su voluntad, y tan- 
^ bien orteguilla su paje, se lo avia dho al montezuma, que 
nros capitanes Eran los que le aconsejaron que le prendiesen 
. e q no creyese a cortes y que sin el los no le soltaria, dixo el 
montezuma q muy bien estava preso, y q hasta ver En que 
paravan los tratos de sus sobrinos, y que luego Enbiaria men- 
sageros a cacamatzin, rrogandole que viniese antel que le 
queria hablar, En amistades Entre el y nosotros, y le Enbio 
a dezir, que de su prision, que no tenga el cuidado, que si se 
quisiese soltar que muchos tienpos a tenido para ello y que 
malinche le ha dho dos vezes que se vaya a sus palagios, y 
, ql no quiere, por cunplir el mando de sus dioses, que le an 
dicho que seste preso, y q si no lo esta que luego sera muerto 
y questo que lo saben muchos dias A de los papas questan 
en sui9io de los ydolos y que a esta cavsa, sera bien que ten- 
ga Amistad con malinche y sus hermanos y estas mismas 
palabras Enbio El montezuma a dezir a los capitanes de tez- 
Cuco, Como enbiava a llamar a su sobrino para hazer las 
amistades, y que mirasen no les trastornase su seso, aquel 
mangebo para tomar armas Contra nosotros. y dexemos esta 
platica que muy bien la Entendio el cacamatzin, y sus prin- 
gipales entraron En consejo, sobre lo que harian y el Ca- 
camatzin Comen§o a bravear, y que nos abia de matar den- 
tro de quatro dias, E que El tio Era vna galliua, E que por 



327 

nodarnosguerraquandoseloaconsejavan, al bajar la sierra 
de chalco, qiiando tuvo alii buen aparejo, con sus guarni§io- 
nes, y que nos metio, el por su persona En su 9ibdad, como 
si tuviera cono85ido que yvamos para hazelle algun bien E 
que quanto oro le an traydo de sus tributos nos dava, y que 
le abiamos escalado y abierto la casa donde esta el tesoro de 
su aguelo axayaca, y que sobre todo esto le teniamos preso, 
E que ya le andavamos diziendo que quitasen los ydolos 
del gran huichilobos, E queriamos poner los nros, E que por- 
questo no viniese a mas mal y para castigar tales cosas, E 
injurias, que les rrogava, que le ayudasen pues todo lo que 
les a dho an visto por sus ojos, y como qiiemamos los capi- 
tanes del mismo montezuma, que ya no se puede Conpades- 
9er otra cosa, sino que todos juntos a vna nos diesen guerra. 
y alii les prometio el Cacamatzin, que si quedara Con el se- 
norio de mexico, que les a via de hazer grandes sefiores y 
tanbien les dio muchas joy as de oro, y les dixo que ya te- 
nia Congertado con sus primos, los sefiores de cuyuacan y 
de yztapalapa, y el de tacuba, y otros debdos que le ayuda- 
rian, E que En mexico tenia de su parte otras personas prin- 
jipales que le darian Entrada y ayuda A qulquiera ora que 
quisiese, y que vnos por las calgadas, y todos los mas En sus 
piraguas y canoas chicas, por la laguna, podrian Entrar sin 
tener Contrarios, que se lo defendiesen, pues su tio estava 
preso, y que no tuviesen miedo de nosotros pues saben que 
pocos dias avia pasado, que En lo de almeria, sus capitanes 
del mismo su tio avian muerto muchos tevles, E vn cavallo, 
lo qual bieron bien la cabeja del vn tevl, E el cuerpo del ca- 
vallo, E que En vna ora nos despacharian, e con nros cuer- 
pos ternian buenas fiestas y artazgas. y desque ovo fecho 
aquel rrazonamiento, dizen que se miravan vnos capitanes a 
otros, para que hablasen los que solian hablar primero, en co- 
sas de guerra, E que quatro o §inco de aquellos capitanes le 
dixeron, que como avian de yr sin li§en5ia de su gran senor 
montezuma, y dar guerra En su propia casa y ^ibdad, y que 
se lo Enbien primero a hazer saber E que si es consentidor 
que yran con el de muy buena voluntad, E que de otra ma- 



828 

nera que no le quieren ser traydores y pares§io ser quel ca- 
camatzin se Enojo con los capitanes que le dieron aquella 
rrespuesta, y mando Echar presos tres dellos y como avia 
alii En el consejo, E junta que tenian, otros sus debdos y 
ganosos de bulli§ios, dixeron que le ayudarian hasta morir, 
E acordo de Enbiar a dezir a su tio el gran monteguma, que 
avia de tener Enpacho Enbialle a dezir que venga a tener 
amistad, con quien tanto mal y deshonrra le a hecho tenien- 
dole preso, E que no es posible sino que nosotros Eramos he- 
chizeros y con hechizos le teniamos quitado su gran Cora^on 
y fuer^a, o que nros dioses y la gran muger de castilla que 
les diximos que Era nra abogada, nos da aquel gran poder 
para hazer lo que haziamos E en esto que dixo a la {)08tre 
no lo Errava, que ^iertamente la gran misericordia de dios 
y su bendita madre nra sefiora nos ayudava, y bolvamos a 
nra platica, que En lo que se rresumio fue Enbiar a dezir, 
quel vernia a pesar nro E de su tio, a nos hablar y matar, y 
quando el gran montezuma oyo aqueUa rrespuesta tan des- 
vergon^ada rresgibio mucho Enojo, y luego en aquella ora, 
Enbio a llamar seys de sus capitanes de mucha quenta y les 
dio su sello y avn les dio ^iertas joyas de oro, y les mando 
que luego fuesen a tezcuco, y que mostrasen secretamente 
aquel su sello, a ^iertos capitanes y parientes, questavan muy 
mal con el Cacamatzin, por ser muy sobervio, E que tuvie- 
sen tal orden y manera, que a el y a los que Eran En su con- 
sejo, los prendiese y que luego se los truxeran delante. y co- 
mo fueron aquellos capitanes, y En tezcuco Entendieron lo 
quel montezuma mandava, e El cacamatzin era malquisto 
En sus propios palagios le prendieron questava platicando 
con aquellos sus confederados, en cosas de la guerra y tan- 
bien traxeron otros ginco presos con el E como aquella 9ibdad 
esta poblada junto a la gran laguna aderegan vna gran pi- 
ragua. Con sus toldos, y le meten En ella co los demas y con 
gran copia de rremeros los traen a mexico y desque ovo des- 
Enbarcado, le meten En sus rricas andas como rrey que Era, 
y con gran acato le Uevan ante montezuma, y pares^e ser es- 
tuvo hablando con el tio, y desvergon§08e mas de lo que an- 






829 

tes estava, y supo montezuma de los congiertos en que anda- 
va, que hera algarse por senor de mexico, lo qui alcan§o a 
saber mas por Entero, de los demas prisioneros que le tru- 
xeron y si Enojado Estava de antes del sobrino, muy mas lo 
estuvo Enton§es y luego se lo enbio a nro capitan, para que 
le hechase preso, y a los demas prisioneros mando soltar, E 
luego cortes fue a los palagios e al aposento del montezuma, 
y le dio las gra§ias por tamafia md y se dio orden que se al- 
§ase por rey de tezcuco al man^ebo questava En conpafiia 
del gran montezuma, que tanbien hera su sobrino, herma- 
no del cacamatzin, que ya E drcho, que por su temor estava 
alii rretraydo, al favor del tio, porque no le matase, que Era 
tanbien Eredero muy propinco del rreyno de tezcuco, y pa- 
ra lo hazer solenemente, y con acuerdo de toda la ^ibdad, 
mando el montezuma que viniesen antel, los mas pringipa- 
les de toda aqlla provingia y despues de muy bien platicada 
la cosa, le algaron por rrey y sefior de aquella gran 9ibdad, 
y se llamo don Carlos, ya todo esto fecho, como los ca§iques y 
rreyezuelos, sobrinos del gran montezuma, que Eran el se- 
fior de cuyuacan, E el sefior de yztapalapa, y el de tacuba, 
vieron y oyeron la prision del cacamatzin, y supieron quel 
gran montezuma avia sabido, que Ellos Entravan En la con- 
jura§ion, para quitalle su rreyno y darselo a cacamatzin, te- 
mieron y no le venian a hazer palagio como solian y con 
acuerdo de cortes, que le conboco E atraxo al montezuma, 
para que los mandase prender En ocho dias todos Estuvie- 
ron presos. En la cadena gorda, que no poco se holgo nro ca- 
pitan, y todos nosotros. miren los curiosos letores, qual an- 
davan nras vidas, tratando de nos matar, cada dia, y comer 
nras carnes, si la gran misericordia de dios, que sienpre Era 
con nosotros, y nos acorria, E aquel buen montezuma, a to- 
das nras cosas dava buen corte, E miren que gran sefior Era, 
questando preso, ansi era tan obedes§ido, pues ya todo apa- 
giguado, E aquel los senores presos, sienpre nro Cortes, con 
otros capitanes E el frayle de la md, estavan teniendole pa- 
lagio, E en todo lo que podian le davan mucho plazer, y 
burlavan, no de manera de desacato, que digo, que no se sen- 

Bemal Dfaz del Ca8tillo.-48. 



330 

tava cortes ni ningun Capitan, hasta que montezuma les 
mandava traer sus asentaderos rricos, y les mandava asen- 
tar y En esto Era tan bien mirado, que todos le queriamos 
con gran amor, porque verdaderamente, Era gran sen or En 
todas las cosas, que le viamos hazer, y bolviendo a nra pla- 
tica, vnas vezes le davan a entender las cosas tocantes a nra 
santa fee y se lo dezia el frayle Con el paje orteguilla, que 
paresgia que le Entrava ya algunas buenas rrazones En el 
Cora§on, pues las Escuchava Con atengion mejor que al prin- 
§ipio. tanbien le davan a entender, el gran poder del enpe- 
rador nro sefior, y como le dan vasallage muchos grandes 
senores q le obedezian y de lexos tierras, y le dezian otras 
muchas cosas que el se holgava de las oyr, y otras vezes ju- 
gava cortes con el al totoliques como e dho otra bez, y desta 
manera sienpre le teniamos palagio, y el como no Era nada 
Escaso, nos dava cada dia, qual joy as de oro o mantas. y de- 
xare de hablar En ello y pasare adelante. 



CAPITULO CI Como el gran montezuma, con 
muchos caciques y pringipales de la co- 
marca, dieron la obidiengia a su magestad, 
y de otras cosas que sobre ello paso 




OMO el capitan Cortes vio que ya estavan presos 
aquellos rreyezillos, por mi memorados, y todas 
las §ibdades pa§ificas, dixo a montezuma, que dos 
vezes le avia Enbiado a dezir antes que entrasemos En me- 
xico, que queria dar tributo a su magestad y que pues ya 
avia entendido el gran poder de nro rrey e sefior E que de 
muchas trras le dan parias E tributos y le son subjetos muy 
grandes rreyes, que sera bien quel y todos sus vasallos, le 



331 

den la obidiengia, porque ansi se tiene por costunbre que 
primero se da la obidiengia que dan las parias o tributes, y 
el montezuma dixo, que juntariasusvasallos, E hablariaso- 
brello, y en diez dias se juntaron todos los mas cagiques de 
I aquella comarca, y no vino el cagiq pariente muy §ercano 

del montezuma, que ya Emos dho que dezian que Era muy 
esforgado, y en la presencjia, y cuerpo, y mienbros, y en el 
I senblante, bien lo pares^ia. Era algo atronado, E en aque- 

I 11a sazon estava En vn pueblo suyo que se dezia tula, y a 

I este Ca§iq segun dezian le venia el rreyno de mexico, des- 

pues del Aontezuma, y como le llamaron Enbio a dezir, que 
no queria venir, ni dar tributo, cf^e avn con lo que tiene de 
sus provingias no se puede sustentar, de la qual rrespuesta, 
ovo Enojo el montezuma, y luego enbio §iertos capitanes pa- 
ra que le prendiesen, E como Era gran senor, y muy enpa- 
i rentado, tuvo aviso dello, y metiose En su provingia', donde 

i no le pudo aver por Enton§es. y dexallo E aqui y dire que 

En la platica que tuvo El montezuma Con todos los caci- 
ques de toda la tierra que avia mandado llamar, que despues 
I que les avia hecho vn parlamento, sin estar cortes, ni nin- 

I guno de nosotros delante salvo orteguilla El paje, dizen que 

I les dixo, que mirasen que de muchos anos pasados, sabian 

por muy §ierto, por lo que sus antepasados les an dho, E an- 
si lo tienen senalado En sus libros de cosas de memorias, 
que de donde sale El sol, avian de venir gentes que avian de 
seiiorear estas tierras y que se abia de acabar En Aquella sa- 
zon, el sefiorio y rreyno de los mexicanos, E quel tiene En- 
tendido por lo que sus dioses le an dho, que somos nosotros, 
E que se lo an preguntado a su huichilobos los papas que 
lo declaren y sobre ello les hazen sacrifigios, y no quieren rres- 
pondelles, como suelen, y lo que mas les da a entender el 
huichilobos es que lo que les ha dho otras vezes aquello da 
agora por rrespuesta. E que no le pregunten mas,E q ansi, bien 
dan a entender que demos la obidiengia al rrey de Castilla, 
cuyos vasallos dizen Estos tevles, que son, y porque al pre- 
sente no va nada En ello, y el tienpo andando veremos si 
tenemos otra mejor rrespuesta de nros dioses, y como viere- 



332 

mos el tpo ansi haremos lo que yo os mando y rruego que 
todos de buena voluntad, al presente, se lo demos, E contri- 
buyamos Con alguna seiial de basallage, que presto os dire lo 
que mas nos convenga, y porque agora soy ynportunado a 
ello por malinche, ninguno lo revse, E mira que En diez y 
ocho anos A que soy vro seflor, sienpre me aveys sido muy 
leales, E yo os he Enrriquezido, E ensanchado vras tierras, 
E OS E dado mando, E hazienda, E si, agora al presente, 
nros dioses permiten que yo este aqui detenido, no lo estu- 
viera, sino que ya os E dho muchas vezes que mi gran vi- 
chilobos, me lo a mandado. E desque oyeron esti rrazona- 
miento, todos dieron por* rrespuesta que harian lo que 
mandase, y con muchas lagrimas y sospiros, y el montezu- 
ma muchas mas y luego enbio a dezir, con vn principal, que 
para otro dia darian la obidien§ia, y vasallage, a su mages- 
tad, que fueron En ^ dias del mes de * de mill E quinientos 
y diez y nueye anos. despues montezuma bolvio a hablar 
con sus ca§iques sobre El caso, estando cortes delante, E 
nros capitanes y muchos soldados, y pero hernandez, secre- 
tario de cortes dieron la obidien§ia A su magestad y con mu- 
cha tristeza, que mostraron, y el montezuma no pudo soste- 
ner las lagrimas, E queriamoslo tanto, E de buenas Entranas 
que a nosotros de velle Uorar se nos Enterne§ieron los ojos, 
y soldado ovo que llorava tanto como montezuma, tanto Era 
el amor que le teniamos. y dexallo E aqui, y dire, que sien- 
pre cortes y el frayle de la merged, que Era bien entendido, 
estavan En los pala§ios del montezuma, por alegralle, atra- 
yendole para que dexe sus ydolos, y pasare adelante 

1 Hay iin espacio en bianco en el original. 

2 Hay aqui otro espacio en bianco en el original. 



333 



CAPITULO CII. Como nro cortes procure 
de saber de las minas del oro y de que ca- 
lidad Eran, y ansi mismo En que rrios esta- 
van, y que puertos para navios avia, desde 
lo de panuco, hasta lo de tavasco, E special- 
mente el rrio grande de guaqaqualco y lo 
que sobrello paso. 




ISTANDO cortes, E otros capitanes, con el gran mon- 
tezuma teniendole palagio, Entre otras platicas que 
le dezia, con nras lenguas dofia marina, y geroni- 
mo de aguilar e orteguilla, le pregunto, que a que parte Eran 
las minas, E En que rrios, E como, y de que manera coxian 
el oro que le trayan En granos, porque queria Enbiar a he- 
llo, dos de nros soldados, grandes mineros, y el monteguma 
dixo, que de tres partes, y que de donde mas oro le solian 
traer, que Era de vna provin§ia que se dize gacatula, ques a 
la vanda del sur. questa de aquella Qibdad, andadura de diez 
o doze dias, y que lo coxian con vnas xicales, E que lavan 
la tierra, para que alii queden vnos granos menudos despues 
de labado E que agora, al presente, que se lo traen de otra 
provingia, que se dize tustepeque, gerca de a donde desen- 
barcamos, ques en la banda del norte, E que lo coxen de dos 
rrios, E que yerca de aqlla provingia ay otras buenas minas, 
en pte que no son sus subjetas, que se dizen los chinantecas, 
y §apotecas, y que no le obedes§en y que si quiere Enbiar 
sus soldados, quel dara prin§ipales, que vayan con ellos, y 
cortes le dio las gragias por ello, y luego despacho a vn piloto 
que se dezia gongalo de vnbria, con otros dos soldados mine- 



334 

ros a lo de ^^^catula, aqueste gon§alo de vnbria, era al que 
cortes mando cortar los pies, quando ahorco A pedro Escu- 
dero E a joan yermeno, y agoto los penates, porque se alga- 
ban En san jvan de vlua, con el navio, segun mas largamen- 
te lo tengo escrito en el capitulo que dello habla. y dexemos 
de contar mas en lo pasado y digamos como fueron eo el 
vnbria y se les dio de plazo para yr y bolber quarenta dias. 
E por la banda del norte despacho para ver las minas a vn 
capitan que se dezia pigarro, man§ebo de hasta veynte e gin- 
co anos, y a este pi§arro tratava cortes como a pariente. En 
aquel tienpo no avia fama del peru ni se nonbravan pi^arros 
En esta tierra, E con quatro soldados fue y llevo de plazo 
otros quarenta dias para yr y bolver, porque avia desde me- 
xico obra de ochenta leguas, E con quatro pringipales mexi- 
canos. ya partidos para ver las minas Como dho tengo, bol- 
vamos a dezir como le dio el gran montezuma a nro capitan 
En vn pano de Enequen, .pintados y senalados, muy al na- 
tural todos los rrios E ancones, que avia En la costa del nor- 
te, desde panuco hasta tavasco, q son obra de giento y quaren- 
ta leguas, y En ellos venia senalado, el rrio de guajaqualco, 
E como ya sabiamos todos los puertos, E ancones que sena- 
lavan En el paiio que le dio el montezuma, de quando veni- 
mos a descubrir con grijalva, Egeto el rrio de gua§aqualco, q 
dixeron que Era muy poderoso y hondo, acordo cortes de en- 
biar a ver q cosa Era, y para sondar el puerto y la Entrada, 
y como vno de nros capitanes que se dezia diego de ordas, 
otras vezes por mi memorado. Era honbre muy Entendido 
y bien esforgado, dixo al capitan, quel queria yr a ver aquel 
rrio, E que tierras avia, y que manera de gente Era, y que 
le diese honbres yndios pringipales, q vayan con el y cor- 
tes lo rrehusava, por ser honbre de buenos consejos y tenelle 
En su conpaiiia y por no le desconplazer, le dio la ligengia 
para que fuese y el montezuma le dixo al ordas que En lo de 
guagaqualco, no llegava su sefiorio, E que Eran muy esfor- 
gados y que mirase lo que hazia, y que gi algo le aconte§iese, 
no le culpasen A el, y que antes de llegar aquella provingia, 
toparia con sus guarniyiones de gente de guerra q tenia En 



335 

frontera, y que si los oviese menester que los llevase Consi- 
go, E dixo otros muchos cunplimientos, y cortes y el diego 
de Ordas le dieron las gra§ias E ansi partio con dos de nros 
soldados y con otros pringi pales, quel monte^uma les dio. 
aqui Es donde dize el coronista fran*^ lopez gomara q yva 
juan Velazquez, con §ien soldados, A poblar a guagaqualco, 
E que pedro de yr§io avia ydo a poblar a panuco, E porq ya 
estoy harto de mirar En lo quel coronista va fuera de lo que 
paso, lo dexare de dezir y dire lo que cada vno de los capi- 
tanes q nro cortes Enbio hizo, E vinieron con muestras de 
oro. 



CAPITULO CIII como bolvieron los capita- 
nes q nro cortes Enbio A ver las minas E 
a sondear El puertoy rriodeguagaqualco — 

el primero q bolvio a la gibdad de mx*^, a dar rrazon de lo 
que cortes le Enbio fue El gon§alo de oijibria, E sus conpafie- 
ros, y traxeron obra de trezientos pesos En granos q sacaron 
delante dellos los yndios de vn pueblo q se dize gacatula, 
que segun contava el vnbria, los Caciques de aquella provin- 
gia, llevaron muchos yndios a los rrios, y con vnas como ba- 
teas chicas y con ellas labavan la tierra y coxian el oro, y 
Era de dos rrios y dixeron q si fuesen buenos mineros y lo 
lavasen como en la ysla de santo domingo, o como En la ys- 
la de Cuba, q serian rricas minas, y asi mismo truxeron Con- 
sigo dos pringipales, que Enbio aquella provingia y traxeron 
vn presente de oro hecho Enjoyasque valdria dozientos pe- 
sos E a darse, E ofregerse por servidores de su magestad y 
cortes se holgo tan to con El oro como si fueran treynta mill 
pesos, En saber gierto, que avia buenas minas, e a los ca§i- 
ques q truxeron el presente les mostro mucho amor y les 
mando dar quentas verdes de castilla, y con buenas palabras 
se bolvieron a su tierra muy contentos, y dezia el vnbria, 



336 

q no muy lexos de mexico avia grandes poblazones y de gen- 
te polida, y pares§e ser Eran los pueblos del pariente del 
montezuma y otra provingia que se dize matalzingo, E A lo 
q sentimos y vimos el vnbria y sus conpaneros vinieron rri- 
cos con mucho oro y bien aprovechados, q a este Efeto le 
enbio cortes para hazer buen amigo del por lo pasado que 
dho ten go. dexemosle pues bolvio con buen rrecavdo y bol- 
vamos al Capitan diego de ordas que fue a ver El rrio de 
gua§aqualco que son sobre §iento y veynte leguas de mexi- 
co y dixo q paso por muy grandes pueblos q alii los nonbro, 
E que todos le hazian honrra y que En el camino gerca de 
guagaqualco, topo a las guarni§iones de montezuma questa- 
van en frontera, E q todas aquellas comarcas, se quexavan 
dellos, ansi de rrobos que les hazian, y les tomavan sus mu- 
• geres y les demandavan otros tributos, y El ordas Con los 
pringipales mexicanos q llevava rreprehendio a los capitanes 
de montezuma que tenian cargo de aquellas gentes, y les 
amenagaron que si mas rrobavan que se lo arian saber a su 
sefior montezuma y que Enbiaria por ellos y los castigaria 
como hizo a quetzalpopoca y sus conpaneros porque abian 
rrobado los pueblos de nros amigos y con Estas palabras, les 
metio temor y luego fue camino de gua§aqualco, y no llebo 
mas de vn principal mexicano y desque El cacique de aque- 
11a provin§ia q se dezia tochel supo que y va, Enbio sus prin- 
gipales a le rregebir y le mostraron mucha voluntad, porq 
aquellos de aquella provingia, ya todos tenian rrelagion y 
notigia de nras personas, de quando venimos A descubrir con 
juan de grixalva, segun largamente lo escrito En el capitu- 
lo pasado q dello habla, y boluamos a dezir q desque los ca- 
ciques de guagaqualco Entendieron a lo q y va luego le dieron 
muchas y grandes canoas y El mesmo cagique tochel y con 
El otros muchos pringipales sondaron la boca del rrio, y ha- 
Uaron tres bra§as largas, sin la de cayda. En lo mas baxo, y 
Entrados En el rrio vn poco arriba podian nadar grandes 
navios, y mientras mas arriba, mas hondo,y junto a vn pue- 
blo, que En aquella sazon estava poblado de yndios pueden 
Estar carracas y desque el ordas lo ovo sondado, y se vino 



837 

5on los ca§iques al pueblo, le dieron Qiertas joyas de oro, y 
vna yndia muy hermosa y se ofresyieron por servidores de 
■su magestad y se le quexaron del montezuma y de su guar- 
ni;ion de gente de guerra y que avia poco tienpo q tuvieron 
vna batalla con EUos y que gerca de vn pueblo de pocas ca- 
sas mataron los de aquella provinyia a los mexicanos mu- 
5hos de sus gentes y por aquella cavsa Uaman oy En dia, 
donde aquella guerra paso, cuylonemiquis, que En su len- 
gua quiere dezir donde mataron los putos mexicanos, y El 
ordas le dio muchas gragias por la honrra que avia rresyebi- 
do, y les dio §iertas quentas de castilla q llevava para aquel 
Efeto, y se boluio a mexico, y fue alegremente rregebido de 
-cortes, y de todos nosotros, y dezia que Era buena trra para 
ganadosy grangerias y El puerto a pique para las yslas de 
•Cuba y santo domingo, y xamayca, E§eto q Era lexos de me- 
xico, y avia grandes gienegas, y a Esta cavsa nunca tuvimos 
cxjnfian§a del puerto, para El descargo, y trato de mexico. 
■dexemos al ordas, y digamos del Capitan pi§arro y sus con- 
paneros que fueron En lo de tustepeque a buscar oro y ver 
las minas que bolvio El pizarro con vn soldado solo A dar 
juenta a cortes y truxeron sobre mill pesos, de granos de 
oro, sacado de las minas y dixeron, que En la provin§ia 
de tustepeque y malinaltepeque y otros pueblos comarcanos, 
fue a los rrios Con mucha gente que le dieron, y coxieron la 
tergia parte del oro que alii trayan y que fueron En las sie- 
rras mas arriba, a otra provin§ia que se dize los chinantecas 
y como llegaron A su tierra que salieron muchos yndios Con 
armas, que son vnas lan9as mayores que las nras y arcos y 
flechas y pavesinas y dixeron q ni vn yndio mexicano no 
les Entrase En su tierra, si no que les matarian y que los 
tevles que vayan mucho En buen ora, y ansi fueron y se 
quedaron los mexicanos q no pasaron adelante y desque los 
ca§iques de chinanta Entendieron a lo que yvan juntaron 
copia de sus gentes para lavar oro, y lo llevaron a vnos rrios 
donde coxieron El demas oro q venia por su parte En granos 
crespillos porq dixeron los mineros, que aquello Era de mas 
4uraderas minas como de na§imiento, y tanbien truxo el 

Bernftl Diaz del Ca8tmo.-44. 



888 

capitan pi§arro dos cagiques de aquella tierra, que vinieron- 
a ofre§erse por vasallos de su magestad, y tener nra amistad,. 
y avn truxeron vn presente de oro, y todos aquellos cagiques 
a vna dezian mucho mal de los mexicanos, que Eran tan 
aburridos de aquellas proving] as por los rrobos que les ha- 
zian que no los podian ver ni avn mentar sus nonbres. cor- 
tes rresgibio bien al pigarro, y a los pringipales q traya y to- 
mo El presente que le dieron y porq an pasado muchos anos 
no me acuerdo que tanto Era, y se ofregio con buenas pala- 
bras que les ayudaria y seria su amigo de los chinantecas, y 
les mando q se fuesen, y porq no rresgibiesen algunas mo- 
lestias de mexicanos En el camino mando a dos pringipales 
mexicanos, que les pusiesen En sus tierras, y que no se qui* 
tasen dellos, hasta questuvieseh En salvo, y fueron muy 
' contentos. bolvamos a nra platica, q pregunto cortes por los 
demas soldados que avia llevado el pigarro En su conpania, 
que se dezian barrientos y Eredia el viejo, y escalona El mo- 
go, y gervantes El chocarrero, y dixo que porque les paresgio 
muy bien aquella tierra y Era rrica de minas y los pueblos 
por donde fue, muy de paz, les mando que hiziesen vna gran 
estangia de cacahuatales y mayzales, y pusiesen muchas aves 
de la tierra y otras grangerias que avia de algodon y que 
desde alii fuesen catando todos los rrios y viesen que minas 
avia, y puesto que cortes callo por entonges no se lo tuvo a 
bien a su pariente aver salido de su mandado, supimos que 
En secreto rrino mucho con el, sobrello e le dixo, q Era de 
poca calidad qrer entender en cosas de criar aves e cacagua- 
tales y luego Enbio otro soldado que se dezia alonso luys a 
llamar a los demas que avia dexado el pigarro, y para que 
luego viniesen llevo vn mandamiento y lo que aquellos sol- 
dados hizieron dire adelante En su tienpo y lugar 



€APITULO CIIII— Como cortes dixo al 
gran montezuma, que mandase a todos los 
cacjiques de toda su tierra q tributasen a 
su m pues comunm*® sabian q tenian oro, 
y lo q sobrello se hizo. 




fUES Como el capitan diego de ordas y los demas sol- 
dados por mi ya memorados vinieron con muestras • 
de oro y rrela§ion que toda la tierra Era rrica, Cor- 
tes Con consejo del ordas y de otros Capitanes y soldados 
.acordo de dezir y demandar Al montezuma, que todos los 
■Caciques y pueblos de la tierra tributasen a su m, y quel mes- 
mo Como gran senor, tanbien diese de sus tesoros y rrespon- 
lio q El Enbiaria por todos los pueblos a demandar oro, mas 
-que muchos dellos no lo alcan9avan, sino joy as de poca va- 
lia que avian avido de sus antepasados, y de presto despa- 
5ho pringipales a las partes donde avia mynas y les mando 
-que diese cada pueblo tantos texuelos de oro fino, del tama- 
no y gordor de otros q le solian tributar y llebavan para mues- 
tras dos tejuelos y de otras partes no le trayan sino joyezue- 
las de poca valia. tanbien Enbio a la provingia donde Era 
•cacique y sefior aquel su pariente muy yercano q no le qria 
obedesyer, otra vez por mi memorado, questava de mx~ 
obra de doze leguas y la rrespuesta que truxeron los mensa- 
geros, que dezia que no queria dar oro, ni obedesger al mon- 
tezuma, y que tanbien el Era sefior de mx*^ y le venia el se- 
fiorio, Como al mesmo montezuma q le enbiaba a pedir por 
tributo y desque esto oyo el montezuma tuvo tanto Enojo, 
que de presto Enbio su senal y su sello y con buenos capita- 
nes para q se lo truxesen preso y venido En su presengia el 



840 

pariente, le hablo muy desacatadamente y sin ningun te- 
mor o de muy esforgado, e dezian q tenia rramos de locura^ 
porque Era Como Atronado, todo lo qual alcan§o a saber 
Cortes y enbio a pedir por md Al montezuma q se le diese 
quel lo queria guardar porq segun le dixeron, le avia man- 
dado matar el montezuma y traydo ante cortes le hablo muy 
amorosamente, y q no fuese loco, Contra su senor, y le qria 
soltar y montezuma desque lo supo dixo q no le soltasen si- 
no q le hechasen En la cadena gorda, Como a los otros rre- 
yezuelos pot mi ya nonbrados. tornemos a dezir que En obra 
de veynte dias vinieron todos los pringipales que montezu- 
ma avia Enbiado a cobrar los tributos del oro, q dho tengo, 
y asi Como vinieron, Envio a Uamar a cortes y a nros Capita- 
nes, y a §iertos soldados que Conocia, q Eramos de la guarda, 
y dixo Estas palabras formales, o otras Como ellas, hago os 
saber sefior malinche, y sefiores Capitanes y soldados, que a 
vro gran rrey, yo le soy en cargo, y le tengo buena voluntad 
ansi por ser tan gran senor Como por aver Enbiado de tan 
lexos tierras a saber de mi y lo que mas me pone el pensa- 
miento, Es que el A de ser El que nos A de sefiorear segun 
nros antepasados nos an dho, y avn nros dioses nos dan a 
Entender por las rrespuestas que dellos tenemos. toma Ese 
oro, que se A rrecogido por ser de priesa no se trae mas. lo 
que yo tengo aparejado para el Enperador, es todo el teso- 
ro, que E avido de mi padre, questa En vro poder y Aposen- 
tos, que bien se q luego q aqui venistes, abristes la casa, y lo 
mirastes todo y la tornastes a gerrar Como de antes estava, 
y quando se lo enbiaredes dezilde, en vros amales y cartas,. 
Esto, 08 Enbia vro buen vasallo montezuma, y tanbien yo 
OS dare vnas piedras muy rricas q le Enbyes En mi nonbre, 
que son chalchihuis, que no son para dar a otras personas, 
sino para ese vro gran sefior, que vale cada vna piedra, 
dos cargas de oro, tanbien le quiero Enbiar, tres yerbatanas, 
Con sus esqueros y bodoqueras, y que tienen tales obras de 
pedreria, que se holgara de vellas y tanbien yo quiero dar 
de lo que tuviere avnqs poco, porq todo El mas oro y joyas 
que tenia, os E dado En vezes. y desq aquello le oyo cortes 



1 



341 

y todos nosotros, estuvimos espantados de la gran bondad 
y liberalidad del gran montezuma, y con mucho acato, le 
quitamos todos las gorras de armas y le dixiraos que se 
lo teniamos En md, y con palabras de mucho amor, le pro- 
metio cortes que Escreviriamos a su mg, de la manifi- 
§en5ia y franqueza del oro, que nos dio, En su rreal nonbre. 
y despues q tuvimos otras platicas de buenos comedimientos, 
luego En aqlla ora Enbio montezuma sus mayordomos para 
Entregar todo el tesoro de oro y rriqza questava En aquella 
sala Encalada, y para vello y quitalle de sus bordaduras y 
donde estava engastado, tardamos tres dias y avn para lo qui- 
tar y deshazer vinieron los plateros de montezuma de vn pue- 
blo que se dize escapugalco, y digo que Era tanto, que des- 
pues de deshecho Eran tres montones de oro, y pesado ovo 
En ellos sobre seys§ientos mill pesos, como adelante dire, 
sin la plata, E otras muchas rriquezas, y no cuento con ello los 
tejuelos y planchas de oro, y el oro En granos de las minas 
y se comen^Q a fundir Con los yndios plateros, que dho ten- 
go, naturales de E8capu§alco, y se hizieron vnas barras muy 
anchas dello de medida como de tres dedos de la mano el 
anchor de cada barra, pues ya fundido y hecho barras, traen 
otro presente por si de lo quel gran montezuma avia dho que 
daria, q fue Cosa de admiration, de tanto oro, y las rriquezas 
de otras joyas q trujo, pues las piedras chalchiuis Eran tan 
rricas algunas dellas, que valian Entre los mismos ca^tiques 
mucha Cantidad de oro, pues las tres §erbatanas Con sus bo- 
doqueras, los engastos que tenian de pedrerias e perlas y las 
pinturas de pluma y de pajaritos Uenos de aljofar y otras aves, 
todo Era de gran valor dexemos de decir de penachos y plu- 
mas, y otras muchas Cosas rricas, ques para nunca acabar de 
traello aqui a la memoria, digamos agora Como se marco to- 
do el oro que dho tengo Con vna marca de hierro, q mando 
hazer Cortes y los ofigiales del rrey proveydos por Cortes y 
aCuerdo de todos nosotros En nonbre de su magestad, hasta 
qotra cosa mandase, que En aquella sazon Eran gongalo me- 
xia, tesorero, y alonso davila, Contador y la marca fue las 
armas reales como de vn rreal y del tamafio de vn toston de 



342 

a quatro y esto sin las joy as rricas, que nos pares^io q no Eran 
para deshazer, pues para pesar todas estas barras de oro, y 
plata, y las joy as q quedaron por deshazer no teniamos pe- 
sos, de marcos ni balan§as, y pares§io A cortes y a los mes- 
mos ofiyiales de la hazienda de su m, queseria bien hazer de 
hierro vnas pesas de hasta vna arroba y otras de media Arro- 
ba, y de dos libras, y de vna libra, e de media lybra, e de 
quatro onzas, e de tantas onzas, y esto no para que viniese 
muy justo, sino media onza mas o menos En cada peso que 
se pesava. y desque se peso dixeron los ofigiales del rrey, 
que avia En el oro, asi En lo questava hecho barras, como 
En los granos de las minas, y en los tejuelos y joy as, mas de 
seys§ientos mill pesos, sin la plata y otras muchas joyas, que 
se dexaron de avaliar. Algunos soldados dezian que avia mas, 
E como ya no avia que hazer En ello, sino sacar El rreal 
quinto, y dar a cada capitan y soldado nras partes, E a los 
que quedavan en el puerto de la villa rrica tanbien las suyas 
pares;e ser cortes procurava de no lo rrepartir tan presto, 
hasta que oviese mas oro, E oviese buenas pesas y rrazon y 
quenta de a como salian, y todos los mas soldados y capita- 
nes diximos que luego. se rrepartiese, porque aviamos visto 
que quando se deshazia de las pieQas del tesoro de monte- 
zuma, estava En los montones mucho mas oro y que falta- 
va la tergia parte dello, que lo tomavan y escondian, ansi por 
la parte de cortes, Como de los capitanes, Como el frayle de la 
md, E se yva menoscavando, E a poder de muchas plati- 
cas se peso En lo que quedava, y hallaron sobre seysgientos 
' mill pesos, sin las joyas y texuelos y para otro dia avian de 
dar las partes, E dire Como lo rrepartieron, y todo lo mas 
se quedo con ello El capitan cortes E otras personas y lo que 
sobrello se hizo dire adelante — 



843 



CAPITULO CIIIIL Como se rrepartio El 
oro q ovimos, asi de lo q dio El gran mon- 
tezuma como lo q se rrecogio de los pue- 
blos y de lo q sobrello acaesqio a vn sol- 
dado. 

lo primero se saco El rreal quinto, y luego Cortes dixo que 
le sacasen a el otro quinto, Como a su magestad, pues se lo 
prometimos En el arenal quando le al§amos por Capitan ge- 
neral y Justi^ia mayor, Como ya lo E dho en el capitulo que 
dello habla. luego tras esto dixo que abia hecho yierta costa 
En la ysla de cuba, que gasto En el armada que lo sacasen 
del monton, y demas desto que se apartase del mismo mon- 
ton la costa que avia fecho diego velazquez. En los navios 
que dimos al traves, pues todos fuymos En ello, y tras esto 
q para los procuradores que fueron a castilla, y demas desto 
para los que quedavan En la villa rrica, q Eran setenta ve- 
zinos, y para el cavallo q se le murio, y para la yegua de 
juan sedeno, que mataron los de tascala de vna cuchillada, 
pues para el frayle de la md, y el clerigo juan diaz y los ca- 
pitanes, y los q trayan cavallos, dobladas partes, E escopete- 
ros y vallesteros por el Consiguiente, e otras sacalinas de ma- 
nera que quedava muy poco de parte, y por ser tan poco, 
muchos soldados ovo q no lo quisieron rresgebir, y con todo 
se quedava cortes, pues en aquel tienpo no podiamos hazer 
otra Cosa sino callar, porq demandar justigia sobrello Era 
por demas, E otros soldados wo que toinaron sus partes a 
jien pesos, y davan bozes por lo demas y cortes secretamen- 
te dava a vnos y a otros por via que le hazia md por Con- 
tentallos, y Con buenas palabras que les dezia §ufrian pues 
vamos a las partes q quedavan a los de la villa rrica, q se lo 
mando llevar a tascala para que alii se lo guardasen, y como 
Ello fue mal rrepartido. En tal paro todo, como adelante dire 



844 

en su tpo. En aquella sazon muchos de nrosCapitanes manda- 
ron hazer cadenas de oro muy grandes a los plateros del 
gran montezuma, que ya E dho q tenia vn gran pueblo de- 
llos, media legua de mx*^ que se dize Escapugalco, y asi mis- 
mo Cortes mando hazer muchas joyas, y gran servi§io de 
bajilla y algunos de nro soldados, q avian hinchido las ma- 
nos, por manera q ya andava publicamente, muchos tejuelos 
de oro marcado y sin marcar, y joyas de muchas diversida- 
des de hechuras, E el juego largo, con vnos nay pes q hazian 
de cueros de atanbores, tan buenos y tan bien pintados como 
los de verdad, los quales naypes hazia vn pedro valen^iano, 
y desta manera Estavamos. dexemos de hablar En el oro, y 
de lo mal que se rrepartio, y peor se gozo, y dire lo que a vn 
soldado que se dezia hulano de cardenas le acaescio. pare^e 
ser aquel soldado Era piloto y honbre de la mar natural de 
triana o del condado, E el pobre tenia En su tierra muger E 
hijos, y como A muchos nos acontes^e, debria destar pobre 
y vino a buscar la vida, para bolverse a su muger E hijos, 
E como avia visto tanta rriqueza En oro En planchas y En 
gran OS de las minas y tejuelos y barras fundidas, y al rre- 
partir dello vio que no le davan sino §ien pesos, Cayo malo 
de pensamiento y tristeza, y vn su amigo Como le veia cada 
dia tan pensativo y malo yvale a ver y deziale que de q Es- 
tava de aqlla manera, y sospirava tanto de rrato En rrato, y 
rrespondio el piloto cardenas, q es el qstava malo, o cuerpo 
de tal comigo, y no E de Estar malo, viendo que cortes ansi 
se lleva todo el oro, y como rrey lleva qui n to, y A sacado 
para el cavallo, que se le murio, y para los navios de diego 
Velazquez y para otras muchas trancanillas y q muera mi 
muger E hijos de hanbrepudiendolosocorrerquandofueron 
los procuradores Con nras cartas y le Enbiamos todo el oro 
y plata q aviamos avido En aql tienpo, y rrespondiole aquel 
su amigo, pues q oro teniades vos para les Enbiar, y el car- 
denas dixo, si cortes me diera mi parte de lo q me cabia, con 
alio se sostuvieran mi muger e hijos, y aun les sobraran, mas 
mira q Enbustes tuvo, hazernos firmar q sirviesemos a su 
magestad con nras partes, y sacar del oro para su padre mar- 



845 

tin cortes sobre seys mill ps, e lo que escondio, y yo, E otros 
pobres questemos de noche y de dia batallando Como aveys 
visto, en las guerras pasadas de tavasco y tascala, y lo de 
^ingapaginga e cholula, y agora estar En tan grandes peli- 
gros Como estamos y cada dia la muerte al ojo, si se levan- 
tasen En esta gibdad, E q se alge con todo el oro y q lleve 
quinto como rrey, y dixo otras palabras sobrello, y que 
tal quinto no le aviamos de dexar sacar, ni de tener tantos 
rreyes, sino solamente a su magestad y rreplico su conpafie- 
ro, y dixo, pues Esos Cuydados os matan, y aora veys q con 
todo lo que traen los cagiques y montezuma, se consume En 
«1 vno En papo y otro En saco e otro so el sobaco y alia va 
todo donde quiere Cortes El y estos nros Capitanes que asta 
El bastimento todo lo llevan por eso, dexaos desos pensa- 
^amientos, y rrogad a dios que En esta gibdad no perdamos 
las vidas, .y ansi gesaron sus platicas, las quales alcan§o a sa- 
ber cortes y como le dezian q avia muchos soldados descon- 
tentos, por las partes del oro, y de lo q avian hurtado del 
monton, acordo de hazer a todos vn parlamento Con pala- 
bras muy melifluas y dixo q todo lo q tenia Era para noso- 
tros, y que El no qria quinto sino la parte q le cabe de ca- 
pitan general y qualquiera q oviese menester algo, q se lo 
laria, y aquel oro q aviamos avido q Era vn poco de ayre 
-que mirasemos las grandes gibdades que ay, y rricas minas 
q todos seriamos senores dellas, y muy prosperos y rricos y 
dixo otras rrazones muy bien dichas, q las sabia bien propo- 
ner y demas desto a giertos soldados, secretamente dava jo- 
yas de oro, y a otros hazia grandes promesas, y mando q los 
bastimentos q trayan los mayordomos de montezuma q lo 
rrepartiesen Entre todos los soldados, Como a su persona y 
demas desto llamo aparte al cardenas y con palabras le ala- 
go, y le prometio que en los primeros navios, le enbiaria a 
castilla, a su muger E hijos, y le dio trezientos pesos, y ansi 
•se quedo contento Con ellos. y quedarse aqui, y dire quan- 
do venga a coyuntura, lo que al cardenas acaesgio, quando 
fue A castilla, y como le fue muy Contrario a cortes En los 
iiego§ios que tuvo ante su mag. 

Bernal Diaz del CastiUo.— 45. 



346 



CAPITUIK) CVL Como ovieron palabras 
joan Velazquez de leon j el tesorero gon- 
Qalo mexia, sobre El oro q faltava de los 
montones, antes q se fundiese, y lo q Cor- 
tes hizo sobre EUo. 




OMO el oro Comunmente todos los honbres lo de- 
seamos, y mientras vnos mas tienen mas quieren, 
Acontesgio que Como faltavan mucha8.pie§afi del 
oro, Conogidas de los montones ya otras vezes por mi dho, y 
juan Velazquez de leon En aquel tienpo, hazia labrar a los 
yndios de Escapu§alco, que Eran todos plateros del gran 
montezuma, grandes cadenas de oro y otras pie5as de ba- 
xillas, para su servi§io, y como gongalo mexia que Era teso- 
rero, le dixo secretam^ que se las diese pues no estavan 
quintadas y Era conogidamente ser de las q avia dado El 
montezuma, y el Juan velazquez de leon q Era muy priva- 
do de Cortes, dixo q no le queria dar ninguna Cosa y q no 
lo avia tomado de lo questava allegado, ni de otra parte nin- 
guna, salvo que cortes se las avia dado, antes que se hiziesen 
barras, y el gongalo mexia rrespondio q bastava lo q cortes 
avia escondido y tomado a los conpaneros y todavia, Como 
tesorero, demandava mucho oro q no se avia pagado El rreal 
quinto, y de palabras En palabras vinieron a se desmandar, 
y Echaron mano a las espadas, y si de presto no los metie- 
ramos En paz, Entranbos a dos acabaran alii sus vidas porq 
Eran personas de mucho ser y valientes por las armas, y sa- 
lieron heridos, cada vno Con dos heridas, y como cortes lo 
supo, los mando Echar presos, cada vno En vna cadena gor- 
da y paresge ser, segun muchos soldados dixeron q secreta- 



847 

mente hablo cortes al Juan velazquez de leon Como Era mu- 
cho su amigo, que se estuviese preso dos dias En la misma 
cadena y que sacarian de la prision al gongalo mexia como 
a tesorero, y esto lo hazia cortes porque viesemos todos los 
capitanes y soldados q hazia justijia, y avn ser el juan ve- 
lazqz vna y carne del mismo capitan, le tenia preso. y porq 
pasaron otras Cosas, a§erca del gongalo mexia, q dixo a cor- 
tes q tomava escodidas sobre el mucho oro que faltava y q 
se le qxavan dello todos los soldados porq no se lo demanda^ 
va al mismo capitan, pues era tesorero y porqs larga rrela- 
§ion, lo dexare de dezir y dire q como el Juan velazqz de 
leon estava preso En vna sala §erca del aposento de monte- 
§uma, En vna cadena gorda y como el ju*^ belazqz Era hon- 
bre de gran cuerpo, y muy menbrudo y quando se paseava 
por la sala llevava la cadena arrastrando y hazia gran sonido 
q lo oyo el montezuma y pregunto a su paje orteguilla, a 
quien tenia preso cortes En las cadenas, y el paje le dixo q 
a juan velazquez, El que solia tener guarda de su persona porq 
ya En aquella sazon no lo Era, sino xpoual de oli, y pregunto 
que por q cavsa y el paje le dixo, q por gierto oro q faltava, y 
aquel mismo dia fue cortes, a tener palasio al montezuma, 
y despues de los acatos acostunbrados, y otras palabras q En- 
tre ellos pasaron, pregunto el montezuma a cortes q por que 
tenia preso a juan velazquez, siendo buen Capitan, y muy es- 
for§ado, porquel montesuma Como otras vezes E dho bien 
conogia a todos nosotros, y avn sus calidades, y cortes le di- 
xo medio rriendo, q porque Era tabalilo, que quiere dezir 
loco, y q porq no le dan mucho oro quiere yr por sus pue- 
blos, y §ibdades a demandallo a los caciques, y porq no mate 
algunos y por esta cavsa lo tiene preso y el montezuma rres- 
pondio, que le pedia por md que le soltase y quel Enbiaria 
a buscar mas oro, y le daria de lo suyo, y cortes hazia como 
q se le hazia de mal soltalle y al fin dixo q si haria por con- 
plazer al montezuma, y paregeme q le senten§io. En q fuese 
desterrado del rreal y fuese a vn pueblo q se dize cholula Con 
meftasajeros dd montezuma, a demandar oro, y primero los 
hizo amigos, al gon§alo mexia E al joan velazquez, E vi que 



348 

dentro de seys dias bolvio de cunplir su destierro y desde 
alii adelaute el gon§alo mexia y cortes no se llevavan muy 
bien y el juan velazquez vino con mas oro. E tray do esto aqui 
a la memoria y avnq va fuera de nra rrelagion, para q vean q 
Cortes, so color de hazer justigia, porq todos le temiesemos,. 
Era con grandes mafias y dexaremoslo aqui. 



CAPITULO CVII. Como el gran ,montezu- 
ma dixo a cortes que le queria dar vua hi- 
ja de las suyas para que se casase Con ella, 
y lo que cortes le rrespondio, j todavia la 
tomo y la Servian y honrravan como hija 
de tal senor. 

como otras muchas vezes E dho sienpre cortes y todos nos- 
otros procuravamos de agradar y servir a montezuma, y te- 
nerle palagio, y vn dia le dixo, el montezuma, mira malin- 
che, que tanto os amo, que os quiero dar a vna hija mia muy 
hermosa para que os caseys con ella, y que la tengays por 
vra legitima muger y cortes le quito la gorra, por la md y 
dixo que Era gran md la que le hazia, mas que Era casado 
y tenia muger E que Entre nosotros, no podemos tener ma& 
de una muger y que El la ternia en aquel grado, que hija de 
tan gran senor meresge, y que primero quiere se buelva xpia- 
na, Como son otras sefioras, hijas de senores, y montezuma 
lo ovo por bien, y sienpre mostrava el gran montezuma su 
acostunbrada voluntad, mas e de vn dia En otro no Qesava 
montezuma sus sacrifi^ios y de matar En ellos personas y cor- 
tes se lo rretraya, y no aprovechaba Cosa ninguna, hasta q to- 
mo consejo Con nros capitanes q que hariamos En aquel 
caso, porq no se atrevia a poner remedio En ello, por no re- 
bolver la §ibdad y los papas qstavan En el huichilobos, y el 
Consejo que sobre ello se dio por nros capitanes y soldados,. 



349 

q hiziese que queria yr a derrocar los ydolos del alto huichi- 
lobos y si viesemos q se ponian en defendello, o que se albo- 
rotavan q le demandase liyengia para hazer un altar En vna 
parte del gran Cu, y poner vn cruzifixo E vna ymagen de 
nra senora y como Esto se acordo fue cortes a los palagios a 
donde Estava preso montezuma, y llebo eonsigo siete capita- 
nes y soldados y dixo al montezuma sefior ya muchas vezes 
E dho A V m que no sacrifique mas animas a Esos vros dio- 
ses q OS traen Engafiados y no lo quiere hazer, E agos, saber 
senor, q todos mis conpaneros, y Estos capitanes q conmigo 
vienen, os vienen a pedir por md, que les deys ligenyia pa- 
ra los quitar de alii, y pornemos a nra senora santa.maria y 
vna cruz, y q si agora no les days ligenQia q Ellos yran a los 
quitar y no querria q matasen algunos papas, y desq El 
montezuma oyo aquellas palabras y vio yr a los capitanes 
algo alterados, dixo, o malinche, y Como nos quereys Echar 
perder a toda Esta gibdad, por questavan muy enojados nros 
dioses Contra nosotros, y avn de vras vidas no se En q pa- 
raran, lo q os ruego Es, q agora al presente os sufrays, q yo 
Enbiare a llamar a todos los papas, y vere su rrespuesta, y 
desq aquello oyo cortes hizo un ademan que le queria hablar 
muy secretamente al montezuma E que no estuviesen pre- 
sentes nros capitanes q llevava en su conpania, los quales 
mando que le dexasen solo, y los mando salir y desq se sa- 
Heron de la sala, dixo al montezuma, q porque no saliese de 
alii aquello E se hiziese alboroto, ni los papas lo tuviesen a 
mal, derrocalle sus idolos, que El trataria Con los mismos 
nros capitanes q no se hiziese tal cosa con tal que En un 
apartamiento del gran Cu, hiziesen vn altar para poner la 
ymagen de nra sefiora, E vna cruz, y quel tienpo andando 
verian quan buenos y provechosos son para sus animas, y 
para dalles salud y buenas sementeras y prosperidades, y El 
montezuma, puesto que con sospiros y senblante muy triste 
dixo quel lo trataria Con los papas, y En fin de muchas pa- 
labras q sobrello ovo se puso En ^ dias del mes de ^ de 

1 Hay un espaeio en bianco en el original. 

2 Hay otro espaeio en bianco en el original. 



360 

mill E quinientos y diez y nueve aiios E puesto nro 
altar apartado de sus malditos ydolos y la ymagen de 
nra sefiora, E vna cruz, y con mucha devo§ion, y todos 
dando gragias a dios, dixo misa cantada El padre de la 
md y ayudaron a la misa el clerigo joan diaz y muchos de 
los nros soldados y alii mando poner nro capitan, a vn sol- 
dado viejo para q tuviese guarda En ello, y rrogo al monte- 
zuma que mandase a los papas q no tocasen En ello, salvo 
para barrer y quemar Ensen^ios y poner candelas de gera 
ardiendo de noche y de dia, E enrramallo y poner flores. y 
dexallo E aqui, y dire lo q sobrello avino. 



CAPITULO CVIIL Como Kl gran montezu- 
ma dixo A nro Capitan cortes, que se sa- 
liese de mexico, con todos los soldados^ 
porq se querian levantar todos los caciques 
y papas, y darnos guerra^ hasta matarnos, 
porq ansi estava acordado, y dado Conse- 
jo por sus ydolos, y lo que Cortes sobrello 
hizo. 

como sienpre a la contina nunca nos faltavan sobresaltos, 
y de tal calidad, q Eran para acabar las vidas En ellos, 
si nro sefior dios no lo rremediara, y fue que como avia- 
mos puesto En el gran Cu, En el altar que hizimos, la 
ymagen de nra sefiora, y la cruz, y se dixo, el santo Evan- 
gelio E misa, pareye ser q los vichilobos, E el tezcat^puca 
hablaron con los papas, y les dixeron q se querian yr de su 
provingia, pues tan mal tratados son de los tevles, E q adon- 
de Estan aquellas figuras y cruz, que no quieren Estar, o 
que ellos no Estarian alii, si no nos matavan e aquello les 
davan por rrespuesta, E q no curasen de tener otra, E q se 



361 

lo dixesen a montezuma, y a todos sus Capitanes, q luego 
comengasen la guerra, y nos matasen, y les dixo El ydolo 
que mirasen, q todo El oro, que solian tener para honrrallos, 
lo aviamos deshecho, y fecho ladrillos, E q mirasen, q nos 
yvamos senoreando de la tierra, y q teniamos presos a ginco 
grandes ca§iques, y les dixeron otras maldades, para atrae- 
Uos a darnos guerra, y para que cortes y todos nosotros lo 
supiesemos, El gran montezuma Enbio a llamar a Cortes, 
para que le queria hablar En cosas q yvan mucho En ellas, 
E vino el paje orteguilla, y dixo, questava muy alterado y 
triste montezuma, E que aquella noche y parte del dia, avian 
estado con el muchos papas y capitanes muy pringipales, y 
secretamente hablavan que no lo pudo entender. y desque 
cortes lo oyo fue de presto al palayio donde estava El mon- 
tezuma y llebo consigo a xpoual de oli q Era capitan de la 
guardia, E a otros quatro capitanes, e a dona marina, E a 
geronimo de aguilar y despues q se le hizieron mucho acato, 
dixo el montezuma, o senor malinche y sefiores capitanes 
quanto me pesa de la rrespuesta y mando que nros tevles an 
dado a nros papas E a mi E a todos mis capitanes, y es que 
OS demos guerra y os matemos e os hagamos yr por la mar 
adelante, lo que E colegido dello y me pares§e que antes q 
Encomien§en la guerra, que luego salgays desta yibdad, y 
no quede ninguno de vosotros aqui, y esto senor malinche 
OS digo, que hagays en todas maneras, que os conviene si no 
mataros an e mira q os va las bidas y cortes y nros capita- 
nes sintieron pesar y avn se alteraron y no Era de maravi- 
llar de Cosa tan nueva y determinada, que Era poner nras 
vidas en gran pelygro sobrello En aquel ynstante pues tan 
determinadamente nos lo abisavan y cortes le dixo quel se 
lo tenia En md El aviso E que al presente de dos Cosas le 
pesava, no tener navios En que se yr que los mando quebrar 
los que truxo, y la otra que por fuerga avia de yr el monte- 
zuma Con nosotros para que le vea nro gran Enperador y 
que le pide por md q tenga por bien que hasta que se hagan 
tres navios. En el arenal, que detenga a los papas y capita- 
nes, porque para ell OS Es el mejor partido, si la Encomien- 



352 

gan Ellos la gerra porque todos moririan si la quisiesen dar, 
e mas dixo, que porque vea montezuma que quiere luego 
hazer lo q le dize, que mande a sus carpinteros, que vayan 
con dos de nros soldados que son grandes maestros de hazer 
navios a cortar la madera gerca del arenal. E el montezuma 
Estuvo muy mas triste que de antes, Como cortes le dixo q 
avia de yr con nosotros antel enperador y dixo quel da- 
ria los carpinteros, y que luego despachase y no oviese 
mas palabras sino obras y que Entre tanto El mandaria 
a los papas y a los capitanes q no curasen de alborotar la 
gibdad, E q a sus ydolos de vichilobos que mandaria aplaca- 
sen Con sacrifigios, E q no seria Con muerte de honbres. y 
con esta tan alborotada platica se despidio cortes y los capi- 
tanes del montezuma, y estavamos todos con gran Congoja, 
esperando quando avian de comengar la guerra. luego cortes 
mando llamar a martin lopez, Carpintero de hazer navios y 
andres nunez y con los yndios carpinteros que le dio El gran 
montezuma, despues de platicado El porte que se podria la- 
brar los tres navios, le mando que luego pusiese por la obra 
de los azer y poner a punto, pues que En la villa rrica avia 
todo aparexo de yerro y herreros, y xargia, y estopa, y cala- 
fates y brea, y ansi fueron y cortaron la madera en la Costa 
de la V* rrica y con toda la quenta E Galico della y con bue- 
na priesa Comengo a labrar sus navios. lo que cortes le dixo 
al martin lopez sobrello no lo se y esto digo porque dize El co- 
ronista gomara en su ystoria, que le mando que hiziese mues- 
tra, Como cosa de burla, que los labrava para que lo supiese 
el gran montezuma, remitome a lo que Ellos dixeren, que 
gragias a dios son bivos en Este tienpo, mas muy secretamen- 
te me dixo el martin lopez que de hecho y apriesa los labra- 
va e ansi los dexo en astillero tres navios. dexemosles labran- 
do los navios y digamos quales andavamos todos En aquella 
gran gibdad, tan pensativos, temiendo que de vna ora a otra 
nos avian de dar guerra, y nras naborias de tascala, E dona 
marina ansi lo dezian al capitan y el orteguilla, El paje de 
montezuma, sienpre estava llorando, y todos nosotros muy 
a punto, y buenas guardas al montezuma, digo de nosotros 



353 

estar a punto, no avia negesidad de dezillo tantas vezes, porq 
de dia ni de noche, no se nos quitavan las armas, gorxales e 
antipares, y con ello dormiamos, y diran agora donde dor- 
miamos, de que Eran nras camas, sino vn poco de paja, y vna 
estera y el que tenia vn toldillo ponelle debajo y calgados y 
armados y todo genero de armas muy a punto, y los cavallos 
Ensillados y Enfrenados todo el dia, y todos tan prestos, q 
En tocando al arma, como si estuvieramos puestos E aguar- 
dando para aquel punto, pues velas cada noche que no que- 
dava soldado, q no velava. y otra cosa digo y no por me xa- 
tangiar dello, que quede yo tan acostunbrado a andar armado 
y dormir de la manera que E dho, que despues de conquis- 
tada la nueva espana, tenia por costunbre de me acostar ves- 
tido y sin cama, E que dormia mejor q En colchones. E ago- 
ra quando voy a los pueblos de mi Encomienda, no llevo 
cama e si alguna vez la llevo, no es por mi voluntad, sino 
por algunos cavalleros que se hallan presentes, porq no vean 
que por falta de. buena cama la dexo de llevar, mas En 
verdad que me Echo vestido En ella, y otra cosa digo, que 
no puedo dormir sino vn rrato de la noche, que me tengo de 
levantar a ver el gielo y estrellas, y me E de pasear vn rato 
al sereno y esto sin poner En la cabega cosa ninguna de bo- 
nete ni pano y gragias a dios no me haze mal por la costun- 
bre que tenia, y esto E dho porq sepan de que arte andava- 
mos los vdaderos conquistadores, y Como estavamos tan 
acostunbrados a las armas y a belar. y dexemos de hablar 
En ello, pues que salgo fuera de nra rrelagion, y digamos 
Como nro senor Jesuxpo, sienpre nos haze muchas mds, y 
es que En la ysla de cuba diego velazquez dio mucha prie- 
sa En su armada, Como adelante dire, y vino En aquel yns- 
tante a la nueva espafia, vn capitan que se dezia panfilo de 
narbaez 



Bernal Diaz del Castillo.- 



354 



CAPITULO CIX, Como diego velazquez, 
governador de cuba, dio muy gran priesa 
En enbiar su armada contra nosotros, y en 
ella por Capitan general a panfilo de nar- 
vaez y como vino En su conpania El lii^en- 
(^iado lucas vazquez de ayllon oydor de la 
rreal avdien^ia de santo domingo, y lo que 
sobrello se hizo. 

bolvamos agora a dezir algo atras de nra rrelagion, pa que 
bien se entyenda lo que agora dire ya E dho En el capitulo 
q dello abla que como diego velazquez governador de Cuba, 
supo que aviamos Enbiado nros procuradores, a su mages- 
tad, Con todo el oro que aviamos avido, E el sol y la luna, 
y muchas diversidades de joyas, y oro en granos sacado de 
las minas, y otras muchas cosas de gran valor, y que no le 
acudimos Con cosa ninguna, y ansimismo supo como don 
juan rrodriguez de fonseca, obispo de burgos, o argobispo de 
rrosano, que ansi se nonbrava, E en aquella sazon Era pre. 
sidente de yndias, y lo mandava todo muy asolutamente por- 
q su magestad estava En flandes, y avia tratado muy mal 
el obispo a nros procuradores, y dizen que le Enbio el mysmo 
obispo desde castylla en aquella sazon muchos fabores al die- 
go velazqz y aviso e mandado para que nos Enbiase a pren- 
der y quel le daria desde Castilla todo favor para Ello, El 
diego velazquez co aql gra fabor hizo vna armada de diez y 
nueve navios y con mill y quatrozientos soldados, En que 
trayan sobre veynte tiros y mucha polvora y todo genero de 
aparejos de piedras y pelotas, y dos astilleros que El capitan 
del artilleria se dezia rrodrigo martin y traya ochenta de ca- 
vallo y noventa ballesteros, y setenta Escopeteros y el mis- 



355 

mo diego velazquez, por su persona, y avnque Era bien gor- 
do y pesado andava en Cuba de villa En villa, y pueblo En 
pueblo proveyendo la armada y atrayendo los vezinos que te- 
nian yndios, y parientes, y amigos q viniesen Con panfilo 
de narvaez para que le llebasen presos a cortes y a todos nos- 
otros sus Capitanes y sol dados, o al de menos no qdasemos 
algunos con las vidas y andava tan Enyendido en Enojo, y 
tan diligente, que vino hasta guani-guanico, qs pasada la 
havana mas de sesenta leguas, y andando desta manera, an- 
tes que saliese su armada, paresgio ser, alcan5aronlo a saber 
la real avdiengia de santo domingo y los frayles geronimos 
questavan por governadores, el qual aviso y rrelagion dello, 
les Enbio desde cuba El ligengiado §ua§o, q avia venido aque- 
11a ysla a tomar rresiden^^ia al mesmo diego velazquez, pues 
Como lo supieron la rreal avdiengia y tenian memoria de 
nros muchos y buenos E leales servi§ios que haziamos a dios 
y a su magestad, y aviamos Enbiado nros procuradores con 
grandes presentes a nro rrey y senor, y quel diego velazquez 
no tenia razon ni justiyia pa q Con su mano armada venga 
a tomar vengan§a de nosotros, sino q por justi5ia lo deman- 
dase, y q si venia con la armada q Era gran estorvo para 
nra Conquista acordaron de Enbiar a vn lic^^ q se dezia lu- 
cas vasquez de ayllon, que Era oydor de la misma rreal av- 
diengia, para questorvase la armada al diego velazquez y no 
la dexase pasar y que sobrello pusiese grandes penas y vino 
a cuba el mesmo oydor E hizo sus diligen^ias y protesta^io- 
nes como le Era mandado por la rreal avdiengia para que 
no saliese co su yntengion el belazqz, y por mas penas y rre- 
quirimientos que le hizo e puso no aprovecho Cosa ninguna, 
porq Como el diego velazquez Era tan fabores§ido del obis- 
po de burgos y abia gastado quanto tenia, En hazer aquella 
gente de guerra Contra nosotros no tuvo todos los rrequiri- 
mientos q le yzieron en vna Castaneta, En nada, antes se 
mostro mas bravoso. y desque aqllo vioJEl oydor vinose Con 
el mismo narvaez para poner pa§es, y dar buenos con§iertos 
entre Cortes y el narvaez. otros soldados dixeron que venia 
con ynten5ion de ayudarnos y si no lo pudiese hazer tomar 



356 



la tierra En si por su mag como oydor y desta manera vino 
hasta el puerto de san juan de vlua. y qdarse a aqui, y pa- 
sare adelante, lo que sobrello se hizo. 



CAPITULO CIX [CX] ' Como panfilo de 
narvaez llego al puerto de san juan de vlua 
que se dize la veracruz, con toda su arma- 
da y lo que le su^edio. 

viniendo el panfilo de narvaez con toda su flota, q Eran diez 
e nueve navios por la mar, paresge ser junto a las sierras de 
san martin que ansi se Uaman tuvo vn viento norte y en 
aquella costa es travesia y de noche se le perdio vn navio de 
poco porte que dio al traves, venia en el por capitan vn hi- 
dalgo que se dezia, xpoual de morante, natural de medina 
del canpo, y se ahogaron gierta gente, y con toda la mas flo- 
ta vino a san Juan de vlua, y como se supo de aquella gran- 
de armada, que para averse hecho En la ysla de cuba, grande 
se puede llamar tuvieron notigia della los soldados que avia 
Enbiado cortes, a buscar las minas y vienense a los navios 
del narvaez los tres dellos q se dezian gervantes El chocarre- 
ro, y escalona y el otro que se dezia alonso hernandez Ca- 
rretero, y quando se vieron dentro En los navios y con el 
narvaez, dizque algaban las manos a dios, que les libro del 
poder de cortes y de salir de la gran gibdad de mex~ donde 
cadadia esperavan la muerte, y como comian c6 el narvaez 
y bebian vino y hartos de beber demasiado estavanse dizien- 
do los vnos a los otros delante del mysmo general mira si 
es mejor Estar aqui beviendo buen vino, q no cativo En po- 
der de cortes que nos traya de noche y de dia tan avasalla- 
dos que no osavamos hablar y aguardando de vn dia a otro 

1 Este capltulo se halla cnizado con varias llncas en el original, pero al pa- 
recer no per mano del autor. 



357 

la muerte al ojo. y avn dezia El §ervantes como Era truhan 
so color de gra9ias o narvaez narvaez, q bien aventurado q 
Eres E a que tienpo as venido, q tiene ese traydor de cortes 
allegados mas de sete§ientos mill pesos de oro y todos los 
soldados estan muy mal con el porq les a tornado mucha 
I parte de lo que les cabia del oro de parte E no lo quieren 

I rresgibir lo que les da* por manera q aquellos soldados que se 

nos huyeron, Como Eran rruynes y soezes, dezian al narvaez 
mucho mas de lo q queria saber y tanbien le dieron por avi- 
so, que ocho leguas de alii estava poblada En vna villa que 
! se dize la villa rrica veracruz, y estava En Ella por capitan 

vn gongalo de sandoval, con setenta soldados, todos viejos y 
dolientes y que si Enbiase a ellos gente de gerra luego se le 
darian y le dizen otras muchas cosas. dexemos todas estas 
platicas y digamos como luego lo alcango a saber El gran 
\ monteguma, como Estavan alii surtos en el puerto con los 

I navios muchos capitanes y soldados Enbio sus pringipales 

secretamente, que no lo supo cortes y les mando dar Comida 
y oro y rropa y que de los pueblos mas (jercanos les prove- 
yesen de bastimento, y el narvaez Enbio a dezir al monte- 
zuma muchas malas palabras y descomedimientos contra 
cortes y de todos nosotros, q Eramos vnas gentes malas, la- 
drones, que venimos huyendo de castilla, sin li^engia de nro 
rrey y senor, E q como se tuvo notigia, el rrey nro seiior, 
questavamos En estas tierras, y de los males y rrobos q ha- 
ziamos, teniamos preso al montezuma y para estorvar tantos 
daiios q le mando al narbaez que luego viniese con todas 
aquellas naos, y soldados y cavallos, para q le suelten de las 
prisiones y q a cortes y a todos nosotros, Como malos nos 
prendiesen o matasen y En las mismas naos nos Enbiase a 
castilla, y q desque alia llegasemos, nos mandaria matar, y 
le Enbio a dezir otros muchos desatinos, y Eran los inter- 
pretes para darselo a entender a los yndios los tres soldados, 
que se nos fueron que ya sabian la lengua y demas destas 
platicas le Enbio el narvaez giertas cosas de castilla, y quan- 
do monte9uma lo supo tuvo gran Contento con aquellas nue- 
vas, porque Como le dezian que tenia tantos navios, E cava- 



858 

llos, e tiros y escopeteros, y vallesteros y Eraii mill y 
trezientos soldados, y dende arriba creyo que nos prenderia 
y demas desto Como sus prin^ipales vieron a nros tres solda- 
dos con el narvaez y veiaii q dezian mucho mal de cortes 
tuvo por §ierto todo lo que el narvaez le Enbio a dezir, j'- 
toda la armada se la llevaron pintada En vnos panos al na- 
tural. Enton(,*es el montezuma le Enbio mucho mas oro, 3^ 
mantas y mando que todos los pueblos de la comarca, le lle- 
vasen bien de comer E ya avia tres dias que lo sabia El 
montezuma, y cortes no sabia Cosa ninguna. E vn dia yen- 
dole a ver nro Capitan y tenelle palagio, y despues de las 
cortesias que Entre Ellos se tenian, pares§io al capitan cor- 
tes questava el montecjuma muy alegre y de buen senblante, 
y le dixo que tal se sentia, y el montezuma rrespondio q me- 
jor estava, y tanbien como montezuma lo vio yr a le visitar 
En vn dia dos vezes, temio que cortes sabia de los navios, y 
por ganar por la mano, y no le tuviese por sospechoso, le di- 
xo, seiior malinche, agora En este punto me an Uegado men- 
sageros, de como en el puerto a donde desEnbarcartes, an 
veni(k) diez y ocho e mas navios y mucha gente y cavallos, 
E todo nos lo traen pintado En vnas mantas, y como me vi- 
sitastes oy dos vezes, crey que me veniades a darnuevas de- 
llos, ansi que no abras menester hazer navios, y por que no 
me lo deziades por vna parte tenia Enojo de vos, tenermelo 
En cubierto, y por otra me holgava porq vienen vros her- 
manos, para que todos os vayais a Castilla e no aya mas pa- 
labras, y quando cortes oyo lo de los navios, y vio la pintu- 
ra del pailo, se holgo En gran manera y dixo, gragias a dios 
que al mejor tienpo provee. pues nosotros los soldados Era 
tanto el gozo, que no podiamos estar quedos, y de alegria 
Escaramugearon los de a cavallo, E tiramos tiros y cortes 
estuvo muy pensativo porque bien Entendioque aquella ar- 
mada que la enbiava el governador diego velazquez contra 
el y contra todos nosotros, y como sabio que Era Comunico 
lo que sentia della con todos nosotros capitanes y soldados, 
y con grandes dadivas de oro que nos da y ofres§imientos 
que nos haria rricos, y a todos nos atraya para q estubiesemos 



359 

con el, y no sabia quien venia por capitan y estavamos muy 
alegres con las nuevas, E con el mas oro de lo que nos avia 
dado por via de mer§edes, como que lo dava de su hazienda, 
y no de lo que nos cabia de parte y fue gran socorro, E ayu- 
da que nro sefior Jesuxpo, nos Enbiava. E quedarse a Aqui 
y dire lo que paso En el rreal de narvaez 



CAPITULO CXI. Como panfilo de narvaez 
Enbio Con (jinco personas de su armada a 
rreqrir a gonqalo de sandoval, questava por 
capitan En la villa rrica, que se diese lue- 
go con todos los vezinos y lo que sobrello 
paso- 



OMO aquellos tres malos de nros soldados, por mi 
memorados, que se le pasaron al narvaez, y le da- 
van aviso de todas las cosas que cortes y todos nos- 
otros aviamos hecho desq Entramos En la nueva espana, y 
le avisaron quel Capitan gongalo de sandoval estava obra de 
ocho o nueve leguas de alii, En vna villa questava poblada, 
que se dezia la villa rrica de la veracruz, E que tenia Con- 
sigo setenta vezinos, y todos los mas viejos y dolientes, acor- 
do de Enbiar a la villa a vn clerigo que se dezia gevara que 
tenia buena espesiva, E a otro honbre de mucha quenta, 
que se dezia amaya, pariente del diegd velazqz de cuba, E a 
vn escrivano que se dezia vergara y tres testigos los nonbres 
dellos, no me aeuerdo, los qles enbio para que notificasen al 
gongalo de sandoval que luego se diese al narvaez, y para 
ello dixeron que trayan vnos traslados de las provisiones, E 
dizen que ya el gon^alo de sandoval sabia de los navios por 




360 

nuevas de yndios y de la mucha gente que En ellos venia, 
y conio Era muy varon En sus cosas sienpre estava muy aper- 
§ebido, el y sus soldados armados, y sospechando que aquella 
armada Era de diego velazquez y que Enbiaria a aquella vi- 
lla de sus gentes para se apoderar de ella y por estar mas des- 
enbarayados de los soldados viejos y dolientes los enbio lue- 
go a vn pueblo de yndios que se dize papalote y quedo con 
los sanos y el sandoval sienpre tenia buenas velas en los ca- 
minos de yenpoal que es por donde havian de venir a la villa, 
y estava Conbocando el sandoval y atrayendo a sus soldados 
q si viniese diego velazquez, o otra persona, que no se les die- 
se la villa, y todos los soldados dizen que le rrespondieron 
conforme a su voluntad, y mando hazer Vna horca En vn 
§erro, pues Estando sus espias En los caminos vienen de pres- 
to y le dan notigia, que vienen gerca de la villa donde esta- 
va seys espafioles E yndios de Cuba, y el sandoval aguardo 
En su casa, que no les salio a resgebir ya abia mandado que 
ningun soldado saliese de su casa ni les hablase y como el 
clerigo y los demas q trayan En su conpanya no topava a 
ningun vezino espafiol con quien hablar si no Eran yndios 
que hazian la obra de la fortaleza, e no les entendian, y co- 
mo Entraron En la villa fueronse a la yglesia a hazer ora- 
tion y luego se fueron a la casa de sandoval, q les paresyio 
q Era la ma3^or de la villa, E el clerigo, despues de En nora 
buena esteys, que ansi dizque dixo, y el sandoval le rrespon- 
dio q En tal buena ora viniese, dizen quel clerigo guevara, 
q ansi se llamava, Comen^o vn rra/onamiento diziendo quel 
sefior diego velazquez governador de cuba, avia gastado mu- 
chos dineros en la armada, E q cortes y todos los demas q 
avia traydo En su conpania le avian sido traydores, y que 
les venia a notificar que luego fuesen a dar la obidiengia al 
senor panfilo de narvaez, q venia por capitan general del 
diego velazquez, E como el sandoval oyo aquellas palabras 
y descomedimiento que el padre guevara dixo sestava carco- 
miendo de pesar de lo que oya y le dixo, seiior padre, muy 
ml liablays En dezir Esas palabras de traydores, aqui somos 
me j ores servidores de su magestad, q no diego velazquez, y 



361 

porq soys clerigo, nos castigo Conforme a vra mala crianza, 
anda Con dios a mexico que alia esta Cortes ques capitan 
general y justi§ia mayor desta nueva espafia y os rresponde- 
ra, aqui no teneys mas que hablar. Enton9es El clerigo di- 
xo muy bravoso a su escrivano q c5 el benya que se dezia 
vergara, que luego sacase las provisiones que traya en el seno 
y las notificase al sandoval y a los vezinos que con el esta- 
van, y dixo El sandoval al escrivano, que no leyese ningu- 
nos papeles, q no sabia si Eran provisiones o otras escritu- 
ras y de platica En platica, ya el escrivano Comen§ava a 
sacar del seno las escrituras q traya, y el sandoval le di- 
xo, mira vergara, ya os E dho que no leays ningunos pape- 
les aqui, sino yd a mex^*' y os prometo q si tal leyesedes, 
q yo OS haga dar §ient a§otes porque ni sabemos si soys es- 
crivano del rrey o no, mostrad titulo dello, e si le trays leEl- 
do ny tanpoco sabemos si son originales las provisiones o 
traslados o otros papeles y el clerigo q Era muy sobervio di- 
xo, que hazeys Con estos traydores, sacad Esas provisiones y 
notificadselas, y esto dixo con mucho Enojo. y como el san- 
doval oyo aqlla palabra le dixo q mentia como rruyn cleri- 
go, y luego mando A sus sol dados, que los llevasen presos a 
mexico, y no lo ovo bien dho, quando En hamaquillas de 
rredes, como animas pecadoras, los arrebataron muchos yn- 
dios de los que trabaxavan en la fortaleza, que los llebaron 
a cuestas y en quatro dias dan con ellos 9erca de mx*^ que 
de noche y de dia con yndios de rremuda caminavan, E 
yvan espantados desque vieron tantas gibdades y pueblos 
grandes y lesL trayan de comer y vnos los tomavan y otros 
los dexavan y andar por su camino — dizq yvan pensando 
si era Encantamiento o sueno, y el sandoval Enbio con ellos 
por alguazil, hasta q los llebase a mx®** a p® de solis. El hier- 
no que fue de orduiia, que agora llaman solis tras de la puerta 
y ansi Como los Enbio presos, Escrivio muy En posta A cor- 
tes, quien Era el capitan de la armada y todo lo acaesgido, y 
como cortes lo supo q venian presos y llegavan gerca de mx*^ 
enbioles cabalgaduras para los tres mas pringipales y mando 
q luego los soltasen de la prision y les escrivio q le peso de q 

Bernal Diaz del CastiUo.— 47. 



862 

gongalo de sandoval tal desacato tubiese hecho e q quisiera 
q les hiziera mucha honrra y desq llegaron a mx~ les salio 
a rresgebir y los metio En la gibdad muy honrradamente y 
desq El clerigo y los demas sus conpaneros vieron a mx®* 
ser tan grandisima §ibdad y la riqueza de oro que teniamos 
E otras muchas §ibdades En el agua de la laguna, e todos 
nros capitanes y soldados y la gran franqueza de Cortes, es- 
tavan admirados, y a cabo de dos dias q estubieron eon nos- 
otros, cortes les hablo de tal manera c6 prometimientos y 
halagos y avn les vnto las manos de tejuelos y joy as de oro 
y los torno a Enbiar a su narvaez con bastimento q les dio 
para el camino, que donde venian muy bravosos leones bol- 
bieron muy mansos y se le ofresgieron por servidores y ansi 
como llegaron a §enpoal a dar rrelagion a su capitan, comen- 
garon a convocar todo el rreal de narvaez q se pasasen con 
nosotros. y dexallo E aqui y dire como cortes Escrivio al nar- 
vaez y lo q sobrello paso. 



CAPITULO CXII— Como Cortes despues 
de bien ynformado de quien Era capitan, 
y^uien y quantos venian en la armada, y 
los petrechos de guerra q traya y de los 
ties nros falsos soldados que a narvaez se 
pasaron, escrivio al capitan y a otros sus 
amigos espe^ialmente andres de duero, se- 
cretario del diego velazquez, y tanbien su- 
po Como montezuma enbiava oro y rropa 
al narvaez y las palabras q le enbio a de- 
zir al montezuma y de como venia En aque- 
Ua armada El lic^° lucas vasques de ayllon, 
oydor de la avdiencjia rreal de santo do- 
mingo e la ynstrucjion q traya. 




OMO Cortes en todo tenia gran Ouidado E adverten- 
§ia y cosa ninguna se le pasava q no procurava 
poner rremedio, y como muchas vezes E dho an- 
tes de agora tenia tan a§ertados y buenos capitanes y solda- 
dos q demaa de ser muy esforyados le davamos buenos con- 
sejos, acordose por todos q se escriviese En posta con yndios 
q llebasen las cartas al narvaez antes q llegase el clerigo gue- 
vara, Con muchas quiri^ias y ofres§imientos que todos a vna 
le hiziesemos q hariamos lo que su md mandase y que le 
pediamos por md q no alborotase la tierra, ni los yndios vie- 
sen Entre nosotros divisiones, y esto deste ofresgimiento fue 



364 

por cavsa q como Eramos los de cortes pocos soldados En 
conparagion de los quel narvaez traya porq nos tuviese bue- 
na voluntad, e pa ver lo que sugedia y nos ofre§iesemos per 
sus servidores y tanbien debajo destas buenas palabras, no 
dexasemos de buscar amigos entre los capitanes del narvaez, 
porquel padre guevara y el escrivano vergara dixeron a cor- 
tes que narvaez no venia bien quisto con sus capitanes, y 
que les Enbiase algunos tejuelos y cadenas de oro, porq da- 
divas quebrantan penas, y cortes les Escrivio que se abia 
holgado En gran manera el y todos nosotros sus conpaneros 
con su llegada aquel puerto, y pues son amigos de tienpos 
pasados que le pide por md q no de cavsa a quel montezu- 
ma questa preso se suelte y la gibdad se levante, porque sera 
para perderse el e su gente y todos nosotros las vidas por los 
grandes poderes que tiene, y esto que lo dize porquel mon- 
te§uma esta muy alterado y toda la §ibdad rrebuelta, con las 
palabras q de alia le an enbiado a dezir E q cree y tiene por 
§ierto, que de vn tan esforgado y sabio varon como el es no 
avian de salir de su boca, Cosas de tal arte dhas ni En tal 
tienpo, sino q El gervantes el chocarrero y los soldados que 
llebava consigo lo dirian y demas de otras palabras que En 
la carta yvan, se le ofresgio con su persona y hazienda y q 
en todo se haria lo q mandare, y tanbien escrivio cortes al 
secretario andres de duero y al oydor lucas vasquez de ayllon 
y con las cartas Enbio giertas joyas de oro pa sus amigos, y 
despues que huvo Enbiado esta carta, secretamente mado dar 
al oydor cadenas y tejuelos y rrogo al padre de la md que 
luego tras las cartas fuese al rreal de narvaez y le dio otras 
cadenas de oro y tejuelos y joyas muy Estimadas q diese alia 
a sus amigos. y asi Como llego la primera carta que dho ave- 
mos qscrivio cortes con los yndios antes que llegase el padre 
guevara, q fue el q narvaez nos Enbio, andavala mostrando 
el narvaez a sus capitanes haziendo burla della y avn de nos- 
otros, y vn capitan de los que traya el narvaez, que venia 
por veedor q se dezia salvatierra. dizen que hazia bramuras 
desque la oyo y dezia al narvaez, rreprendiendole que para 
que leya la carta de vn traydor como cortes e los que con el 



365 

estavan, E que luego fuese contra nosotros, e que no queda- 
se ninguno a vida, y juro que las orejas de cortes que las 
avia de asar y comer la vna dellas y dezia otras liviandades. 
por manera que no quiso rresponder a la Carta ni nos tenia 
En vna castaneta y en este ynstante llego el clerigo gueva- 
Ta y sus conpafiSros, y hablan al narvaez q cortes Era muy 
buen cavallero, E gran servidor del rrey, y le dizen del gran 
poder de mexico y de las muchas gibdades que vieron por 
donde pasaron, E que Entendieron que cortes q lesera ser- 
vidor, y hara quanto mandase, E que sera bien q por paz y 
sin rruydo aya Entre los vnos y los otros congierto, E que 
mire el sefior narvaez a que parte quiere yr de toda la nue- 
va espana Con la gente q trae que alii vaya y dexe al cortes 
En otras provingias, pues ay tierras artas donde se pueden 
alvergar. y como esto oyo el narvaez, dize que se Enojo de 
tal manera Con el padre guevara E con el amaya, q no los 
queria despues mas ver, ni escuchar, y desque los del rreal 
de narvaez, les vieron yr tan rricos al padre guevara E al 
escrivano vergara E a los demas, y les dezian secretamente 
a todos los de narvaez tanto bien de cortes E de todos nos- 
otros E q avian visto tanta multitud de oro q En el rreal 
andava En eljuego, muchos de los de narvaez deseavan 
estar ya en nro rreal, y en este ystante llego nro padre 
de la md como dho tengo al rreal de narvaez con los texue- 
los que cortes le dio y con cartas secretas y fue a besar las 
manos de narvaez E a dezille Como cortes hara todo lo que 
mandare, E que tengan paz y amor, y el* narvaez como era 
cabe§udo, y venia muy pujante no le quiso oyr, antes dixo 
delante del mysmo padre, q cortes y todos nosotros Eramos 
vnos traydores, E porquel frayle rrespondia q antes Era- 
mos muy leales servidores del rrey le trato mal de palabra, 
y muy secretamente rrepartio el frayle los tejuelos y cade- 
nas de oro a quien cortes le mando y conbocava y atraya a 
los mas pringipales del rreal de narbaez. y dexallo E aqui 
y dire lo que al oydor lucas vasquez de ayllon y El narvaez 
les acontes§io, y lo q sobre ello paso. 



366 



CAPITHLO CXIIL Como ovieron palabras 
el capitan panfilo de narvaez y el oydor 
lucas Vazquez de ayllon y el narvaez le 
mando prender y le Enbio En vn navio 
preso a cuba o a castilla y lo q sobre ello 
avino. 

pareye ser q Como el oydor lucas vazquez de ayllon venia a 
fabores§er las cosas de cortes y de todos nosotros, porque an- 
si se lo avian mandado, la rreal avdien§ia de santo domingo 
y los frayles geronimos questavan por govern adores como 
sabian los muchos y buenos y leales suigios que haziamos 
a dios primeramente y a nro rrey y senor y del gran pre- 
sente que enbiamos a castilla Con nros procuradores, e de- 
mas de lo q la avdiengia rreal le mando, como el oydor vio 
las cartas de cortes e con ellas tejuelos de oro, si de antes 
dezia que aquella armada que enbiava Era ynjusta y contra 
toda justi§ia, q a tan buenos servidores del rrey como Era- 
mos q era mal hecho benir, de alii adelante lo dezia muy 
mas claro y abler tamente, y dezia tan to bien de cortes y de 
todos los q con el estavamos, que ya en el rreal de narvaez 
no se hablava de otra cosa, y demas desto Como vian y cono- 
§ian En el narvaez ser la pura miseria, y el oro y rropa q 
montezuma les Enbiava todo se lo guardaba y no daba cosa 
dello a ningun capitan ni soldado, antes dezia con boz que 
hablava muy entonado medio de bobeda a su mayordomo, 
mira q no falte ninguna manta, porque todas estan puestas 
por memoria, y como aquello cono§ian del, e cyan lo que di- 
cho tengo del cortes, y los que con el estavamos de muy 
francos, todo su rreal estaba medio alborotado, y tuvo pen- 
samienfo el narvaez, que el oydor entendia en ello e poner 
§izana y demas desto quando monte§uma les enbiava basti- 



367 

mento, que rrepartia el despensero o mayordomo de narvaez 
no tenia Cuenta Con el oydor ni Con sus criados, Como Era 
rrazon y sobrello ovo 9iertas cosquillas y ruydo En el rreal, 
y tanbien por consejo que daban al narvaez el salvatierra q 
dho tengo que venia por veedor y vn juan bono de cuexo 
vizcayno, y sobre todo, los grandes fabores que tenia el nar- 
vaez de castilla de don juan rrodriguez de fonseca, obispo de 
burgos e argobispo de rrosano, tuvo tal Atrevimiento El nar- 
vaez que prendio Al oydor del rrey, y Enbiole preso A el y 
a §iertos sus criados y a su Escrivano y los hizo Enbarcar En 
vn navio y los Enbio A castilla, o a la ysla de cuba y a vn 
hidalgo que se dezia hulano de oblanca, y Era letrado porq 
dezia que cortes Era muy servidor del rrey, y todos nosotros 
los questabamos con el y que eramos dinos de muchas mds 
y que paresgia mal llamarnos traydores, y q era mal hecho 
prender a vn oydor de su magestad, y por esto que le dixo 
le mando Echar preso, y como El gon§alo de oblanca Era 
muy noble, del Enojo murio dentro de quatro dias, y tanbien 
mando echar presos A otros dos soldados, que traya en su 
navio, que sabia q hablavan bien de cortes, y Entrellos fue 
vn sancho de barahona vzo que fue de guatimala. tornemos 
A dezir del oydor q llebavan preso A castilla, que con pala- 
bras buenas y con temores que puso al capitan y al piloto y 
maestre, que le llebavan a cargo en el nabio, q llegados a 
castilla, q su magestad En lugar de paga de lo q hazen, les 
mandaria Ahorcar, y desque aquellas palabras oyeron, le di- 
xeron, que les pagase su trabajo y les llevarian A santo do- 
mingo, y asi mudaron la derrota que les avia mandado El 
narvaez, y llegados a la ysla de santo domingo y desenbar- 
cado desq la avdiengia rreal, q alii residia, y los fray les ge- 
ronimos questaban por governadores oyeron al ligengiado 
lucas Vazquez de ayllon y vieron tan gran desacato y atre- 
vimiento, sintieronlo mucho, y con tanto Enojo, que luego 
lo escrivieron A castilla, Al rreal consejo de su magestad, y 
como El obispo de burgos, Era presidente y lo mandava to- 
do, y su magestad no avia venido de flandes, no ovo lugar 
de se hazer cosa ninguna de justa E nro fabor, antes el don 



368 

joan rrodriguez de fonseca dizque se holgo mucho creyendo 
quel narvaez nos abia ya desbaratado, y quando su magestad 
q estava en flandes, oyo a nros procuradores, y lo quel die- 
go Velazquez y narvaez habian hecho En enbiar la arma- 
da, sin su rreal ligengia, y aver prendido A su oydor, les hi- 
zo harto dano En los pleytos y demandas que despues que 
acusaron A cortes le pusieron, y a todos nosotros, como ade- 
lante dire, por mas q dezian que tenian liyen§ia del obispo 
de burgos, que Era presidente, para hazer la armada q con- 
tra nosotros Enbiaron, pues Como giertos soldados debdos e 
amigos del oyd"^ lucas bazqz de ayllo, bieron ql narbaez abia 
echo aql gra desacato y desatino contra el oyd*" de su mag 
q abia llevado pso e temerosos del narbaez q les traya ya so- 
bre los ojos y estava mal co ellos, aCordaron de se huyr de 
los arenales a la villa, donde estava el capitan sandoval, y 
les hizo mucha honrra, y supo de ellos todo lo aqui por mi 
dicho, y como queria enbiar el narvaez a aquella villa sol- 
dados a prenderle. y lo que mas paso dire adelante. 



CAPITULO CXIIII como narvaez despues 
que echo preso al oyd^ lucas vazquez de 
ayllon e a su escrivano, se paso con toda 
la armada a vn pueblo que se dize cenpoal 
que en aquella sazon hera grande, y lo que 
en el con(5erto y lo que nro Cortez y todos 
nosotros hezimos estando en mexico e co- 
mo acordamos yr sobre narvaez. 

como narvaez vbo ebiado preso al oydor de la abdiengia rreal 
de sato domingo luego procuro de se yr con todo su fardaje 
e moni§iones e pertrechos de guerra a sentar rreal En vn 
pueblo que en aquella sazon hera muy poblado que se dize 



369 

gepoal y la primera cosa que hizo tomo por fuerga al ca§ique 
gordo, que ansi se llama, todas las mantas y rropa e oro que 
cortes le dio a guardar antes que partiesemos para tlascala y 
tanbien le tomo las yndias que abian dado los Cagiques de 
aquel pueblo, q se las dexamos en casa de sus padres porque 
heran hijas de seiiores e para yr a la guerra muy delicadas, 
y hecho esto el ca§ique gordo dixo muchas vezes a narvaez 
que no le tomase cosa alguna de lo que cortes le dexo en po- 
der porque sy lo sabia que se lo tomaban que mataria por ello 
y avn se le quexo al mysmo narbaez de muchos males e 
rrobos que sus gentes le hazian en aquel pueblo, y le dixeron 
que quando estaba alii malinche, q ansi llamavan a cortes, 
y su gente, que no les tomavan cosa ninguna E que hera 
muy bueno y justificado ansi el como todos los tevles que 
traya, E que le diese luego sus yndias e oro e mantas, si no 
que se ebiaria a quexarse a malinche e como aquello le oyan 
hazian burla del lo q dezia y el beedor salvatierra otras ve- 
§es por my nonbrado que hera el que mas brabezas hablaba 
dixo a otros sus amigos e al mysmo narvaez no oys que mie- 
do tienen todos estos Ca^jiques de este nonada de cortesillo 
digo yo myren cuanto vale no dezir mal de lo bueno que di- 
go de verdad que quando dimos sobre el narvaez uno de los 
mas cobardes fue el salvatierra como adelante dire E no por- 
que no thenia menbrudo cuerpo e fuergas mas hera mal en- 
galivado y no de la lengua. dezian que hera natural de vn 
pueblo adelante de burgos. dexemos de hablar del y diga- 
mos como el narvaez enbio a rrequerir a nro capitan e a todos 
nosotros con vnas probisyones que dezian heran traslados de 
los originales que traya para ser capitan por el governador 
diego velazques las quales ebiaba para que nos las notifica- 
sen avn escribano que se dezia hulano de mata el qual des- 
pues fue ballestero y el tienpo andando fue yezino de la pue- 
bla y enbiaba con el a quatro soldados personas muy de ca- 
lidad para ser testigos. e dexallo he aqui ansy al narvaez e 
al escribano que ebiaba e bolbamos a cortes q como cada dia 
theia cartas e abisos ansy de los d^l rreal de narvaez como 
del capitan gongalo de sandoval que quedaba En la billa rri- 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo.-48. 



370 

ca e le hizo saber que thenia alii consygo los §inco soldados 
personas muy pringipales parientes e amigos del li^enyiado 
lucas Vazquez de ayllon que Enbio preso el narvaez que se 
le pasaron del rreal de narbaez E la cavsa que daban por- 
que se binieron fue que pues el narvaez no tube rrespecto a 
vn oydor del rrey q menos se lo ternia a EUos que Eran sus 
devdos de los quales soldados supo muy por extenso El san- 
dobal todo lo que pasaba En el rreal de narbaez q dezia q 
abia de yr En nra busca a mexico para nos prender. pasemos 
adelante y digamos que cortes tomo luego consejo Con nros 
capitanes, E todos nosotros los q sabia que le abiamos de ser 
muy servidores E solia llamar a Consejo para en casos de ca- 
lidad como estos, E por todos fue acordado que brevemente, 
sin mas aguardar cartas, ni otras rrazones, fuesemos sobre el 
narbaez E que pedro de albarado quedase en mexico en guar- 
da de monteguma con todos los soldados que no tubiesen 
dispusi^ion para yr aquella Jornada, tanbien pa q quedasen 
alii las personas sospechosas que sentiamos ser amigos de 
diego Velasquez y en aquella sazon Antes que el narbaez vi- 
niese abia ebiado cortes a tascala por mucho mays porque abia 
malas sementeras En tierra de mexico por falta de aguas E 
ovo necesidad dello E como theniamos muchos yndios nabo- 
rias de tlascala abiamoslo menester. El qual mays truxeron 
e gallinas e otros bastimentos que dejamos a pedro de alva- 
rado e avn le hezimos vnos manparos e fortaleza con ^iertos 
pertrechos tiros de brosne e toda la polbora que abia e ca- 
torqe escopeteros y ocho ballesteros e yinco cavallos e queda- 
ron con el ochenta soldados por todos Y desque el gran mo- 
te^uma vio que queriamos yr sobre narbaez y como cortes le 
yba a ber cada dia e a thenelle palajio jamas Cortes le quiso 
dar a enthender que el m6te§uma ayudava a narvaez e le 
ebiaba oro e mantas e le mandaba dar bastimentos E de pla- 
tica en platica le pregunto m6te5uma a cortez que adonde 
queria yr e para que abia hecho aquellos pertrechos e forta- 
leza E que como andabamos todos rrebotados e lo que cortes 
le rrespondio y eii lo que se rresumio la platica dire ade- 
lante/. 



371 



CAPITULO CXV. como el gran moteQuma 
pregunto a cortes que como queria yr so- 
bre narvaez siendo los que traya el narbaez 
muchos e cortes thener pocos e que le pe- 
saria sy nos viniese algun mal. / 

como estaban platicando cortes y el gran m6te§uma como lo 
thenian de costunbre dixo el m6te§uma a cortes senor malin- 
che a todos vros capitanes e soldados os veo andar desasose- 
gados, e tanbien he visto que no me bisitais sino de quando 
en quando e orteguylla el paje me dize que quereys yr sobre 
esos vros hermanos que vienen en los nabios e qreys dejar 
aqui en my guarda al tonatio hazeme merged que me lo de- 
clareis para que si en algo os pudiese ayudar que lo hare de 
buena boluntad e tanbien seiior malinche no querria que os 
binyese algun desman porque vos theneis muy pocos tevles 
y esos que bienen son ginco bezes mas y ellos dizen que son 
christianos como bosotros e basallos e criados dese vro enpe- 
rador E tienen ymagenes e ponen cruzes e les dizen mysa e 
dizen e publican que soys gente que venystes huyendo de 
bro rrey e que os vienen a prender e matar yo no os entien- 
do por eso mira lo que hazeis /. cortes le rrespondio con vn 
senblante de alegria e le dixo con dona marina que sienpre 
estaba con el en todos los rrazonamientos e avn geronymo 
de aguilar nras lenguas que le dixesen que sy no le abia ve- 
nido a dar rrelagion dello es como le quiere mucho e por no 
dalle pesar con nra partida e que por esta causa lo ha dexa- 
do porque assi tiene por gierto que el moteguma le tiene 
buena voluntad E que quanto a lo que dize que todos somos 
vasallos de nro gran enperador que es verdad e de ser chris- 
tianos como nosotros que si son, e a lo que dizen que veni- 
mos huyendo de nro rrey y sefior, que no es asi, sino que 



372 

nro rrey nos enbio para velle y hablalle todo lo que en su 
rreal nonbrele ha dicho e platicado e a lo que dize que trae 
muchos soldados e nobeiita caballos e muchos tiros e polvo- 
ra E que nosotros somos pocos E que nos vienen a matar e 
prender, nro senor Jesu xpo en quyen creemos e nra senora 
santa maria su bendita madre nos dara fuer§as y mas que no 
a ellos, pues que son malos, e vienen de aquella naanera. E 
que como nro enperador tiene muchos rrey nos. e senorios, ay 
en ellos mucha diversidad de gentes, vnas muy esfor§adas e 
otras mucho mas eque nosotros somos de dentrode Castilla, 
que llaman Castilla la bieja, e nos dizen castellanos E que 
el capitan que esta aora en §enpoal y la gente que trae, es de 
otra provin§ia que llaman bizcaya E se llaman bizcainos que 
hablan como los otomyes tierra de mexico, E que el vera 
qual se los trayamos presos, que no tubiese pesar por nra yda 
que presto bolberiamos con bitoria e lo que agora le pide por 
mer§ed, es que myre queda con el su hermano tonatio, que 
asi llamaban a pedro De alvarado, con ochenta soldados, 
que despues que salgamos de aquella §iudad, no haya algun 
alboroto, ni consyenta a sus Capitanes e papas hagan cosa 
que despues que bolbamos, thengan los rreboltosos que pa- 
gar con las vidas E que todo lo que huviese menester de bas- 
timentos, que se lo den, e alii le abra§o Cortes dos bezes Al 
moteguma e ansi mysmo el monte§uma Al Cortes, e dona 
marina, como era tan abisada, se lo dezia de arte, que poftya 
tristeza con nra partida. ally se ofres5io que haria todo lo que 
cortez le abia encargado y avn prometio que ebiaria en nra 
ayuda §inco mill honbres de guerra, e Cortez le dio las gra- 
§ias por ello, porque bien vio que no los abia de enbiar e le 
dixo que no avia menester mas de la ayuda de dios prime- 
ramente y de sus conpaneros e tanbien dixo que myrase que 
la ymagen de nra senora e la cruz, que sienpre lo tubiesen 
enrramada y con candelas de gera que tuviesen sienpre en- 
gendidas de noche y de dia E que no consyntiesen a ningun 
papa que hiziesen otra cosa, porque en aquello conos§eria su 
buena amystad. y despues de tornados otra vez a se abra§ar 
le dixo que le perdonase que no podia estar mas con el por 



373 

entender en la partida y luego hablo a pedro de albarado e 
a todos los soldados que con el quedaban e les encargo que 
en todo guardasen al gran monte§uma no se soltase e que obe- 
de9iesen a pedro de albarado E que prometia que mediante 
nro senor dios a todos les avia de ha§er rricos e alii se quedo 
con ellos el clerigo Joan diaz que no fue con nosotros E otros 
honbressospechosos E nos abragamos los vnos a los otros, e 
syn Uevar yndias ny sugio syno a la ligera tiramos por nras 
jornadas por chelula y en el camyno enbio cortes a tlascala 
a rrogar a nros amigos xicotenga y mase escape que nos en- 
biasen de presto ginco mill honbres de guerra y enbiaron a 
dezir que sy fueran para contra yndios como ellos, que si hi- 
zieran, e avn muchos mas E que para contra tevles'como 
nosotros, e contra lonbardas y ballestas que no querian y 
proveyeron de veynte cargas de gallinas, e tanbien cortes es- 
cribio a sandobal que se juntase con todos sus soldados muy 
prestamente con nosotros que ybamos a vnos pueblos obra 
de do9e leguas de senpoal que se dizen tanpanyquita e mi- 
tlanguita, que aora son de la encomienda de pedro nioreno 
medrano que bibe en la puebla, e que mirase muy bien el 
sandobal que narvaez no le prendiese ny obiese a las manos 
a el ni a ninguno de sus soldados pues yendo que ybamos de 
la manera que he dicho con mucho con§ierto para pelear si 
Encontrasemos gente de guerra de narvaez o al misnio nar- 
vaez y nros corredores del canpo descubriendo e sienpre vna 
Jornada adelante dos de nros soldados grandes peon es perso- 
nam de mucha confianga, y estos no yban por camyno derecho 
sino por partes que no podian yr a cavallo para saber e yn- 
quirir de yndios de la gente de narvaez pues yendo nros co- 
rredores del canpo descubriendo bieron benyr a vn alonso 
de mata el que dezian que hera escribano que venia a noti- 
ficar los papeles o traslados de las probisyones segun dixe 
atras En el capitulo que dello habla, e a los quatro espano- 
les q con el benyan por testigos, y luego vinieron los dos 
nros soldados de a caballo a dar mandado y los otros dos co- 
rredores del Canpo se estubieron en palabras con el aP mata 
e con los quatro t^s, y en este ynstante nos dimos priesa en 



374 

andar e alargamos el paso e desque Uegaron §erca de nosotros 
hizieron gran rreverengia a cortes y a todos nosotros y cor- 
tes se apeo del caballo y supo a lo que benian e como el al^ 
de mata queria notificar los despachos que traya cortes le 
dixo que sy hera escrivano del Rey y dixo que sy, e man- 
dole que luego esybiese el titulo E que sy lo traya que leyese 
los rrecaudos e que haria lo que viese que hera servi§io de 
dios e de su magestad e si no le traya que no leyese aque- 
llos papeles E que tanbien abia de ver los originales de su 
mg por manera que el mata medio cortado e medroso porque 
no era escribano de su mag e los que con el venian no sabian 
que se dezir, e cortes les mando dar de comer porque rrepara- 
mos ally e les dixo Cortes que ybamos a vnos pueblos 5erca 
del rreal del sefior narbaez que se dezian tanpanequy ta y que 
alii podia ebiar a notificar lo que su Capitan mandase, y the- 
nia cortes tanto sufrimiento que nunca dixo mala palabra 
del narbaez, e apartadamente hablo con ellos e les tomo las 
manos e les dio 9ierto oro e luego se bolbieron a su narbaez 
diziendo bien de cortes e de todos nosotros e como muchos 
de nros soldados por gentileza en aquel ynstante llebabamos 
en las armas joyas de oro e cadenas e collares al pescue^o e 
aquellos que benian a notificar los papeles las bieron dizen 
en ^enpoal maravillas de nosotros e muchos abia en el rreal 
de narbaez personas prin§ipales que querian venir a traer pa- 
zes y tratar con cortes y desque todos los bian yr rricos por 
manera que Uegamos a panganequyta e otro dia Uego el 
Capitan sandoval con los soldados que thenia que serian 
hasta sesenta porque los demas viejos y dolientes los dexo 
en vnos pueblos de yndios de nros amigos que se dezian pa- 
palote para que alii les diesen de comer, y tanbien vinieron 
con el los 9inco soldados parientes e amigos del liyen9iado 
lucas vasquez de ayllon que se abian venido huyendo del 
rreal de narbaez y venian a besar las manos a cortes a los 
quales con mucha alegria re§ibio muy bien y alii estubo con- 
tando el sandoval a cortes de lo que les acae9io con el clerigo 
furioso gevara e con el bergara e con los demas y como los 
mando Uebar presos a mexico segund e de la manera que di- 






375 

cho tengo en el capitulo pasado y tanbien dixo como desde 
la villa enbio dos soldados como yndios puestos mantillas o 
mantas como yndios propios al rreal de narvaez e como eran 
morenos dixo sandoval que no paresgian espanoles sino pro- 
pios yndios e cada vno llevo vna carguilla de ciruelas a cues- 
tas que en aquella sazon hera tienpo dellas quando estaba 
narbaez en los arenales antes q se pasasen al pueblo de gen- 
poal e que fueron al rrancho del bravo salvatierra, e que les 
dio por las §iruelas vn sartalejo de cuentas amarillas e des- 
que obieron vendido las siruelas el salvatierra les mando que 
le fuesen por yerva creyendo que heran yndios alii junto a 
vn rriachuelo que estaba gerca de los rranchos para su caba- 
llo, e fueron e cogieron vnas carguillas de yerva y esto hera 
a ora del ave maria quando bolbieron con la yerva y se es- 
tubieron en el rrancho en cluquillas como yndios hasta que 
anoches§io e thenian ojo y sentido en lo que dezian 9iertos 
soldados del narbaez que vinieron a thener palagio e conpa- 
jaia al salvatierra/. dizque les dezia el salvatierra o a que 
tienpo hemos venido que tiene allegado ese traidor de cortes 
mas de siete §ientos mill pesos de oro y todos seremos rricos 
pues los soldados e Capitanes que consigo trae no sera me- 
nos sino que tengan mucho oro y dezian por ay otras pala- 
bras, e desque fue bien escuro vienen los dos de nuestros sol- 
dados que estavan hechos como yndios e callando salen del 
rrancho y van a donde thenia el caballo y con el freno que 
estaba junto con la silla le enfrenan y ensillan e cabalgan en 
el e viniendose para la villa e de camino topan otro caballo 
maneado cabe el riachuelo y tanbien se lo truxeron/ . e pre- 
gunto cortes al sandobal por los mismos caballos e dixo que 
los dexo en el pueblo de papalote donde quedaban los do- 
lientes porque por donde el venia con sus conpaneros no 
podian pasar caballos porque hera tierra muy fragosa e de 
grandes sierras e que vino por alii por no topar con gente 
del narbaez e quando cortes supo que hera el vn caballo del 
salvatierra se holgo en gran manera e dixo agora brabeara 
mas desque le halle menos/. bolbamos al salvatierra que 
desque amanesgio e no hallo a los dos yndios que le truxe- 



376 

ron a bender las §iruelas ni hallo su caballo ni la si 11a y el 
freno, dixeron despues muchos soldados de los del mismo 
narvaez que dezia cosas que los hazia rreyr porque luego co- 
nos§io que heran espafioles de los de cortez los que les Ueba- 
ron los caballos, e desde alii adelante se belaban. bolbamos 
a nra materia y luego cortez con todos nros capitanes y sol- 
dados estuvimos praticando como y de que manera daria- 
mos En el Real de narbaez e lo que se concerto antes que 
fuesemos sobre el narbaez dire adelante. 



377 



CAPITULO CXVII [CXVI] como acordo 
Cortez con todos nros soldados que toma- 
semos a enbiar al rreal de narbaez al frai- 
le de la merged que hera muy sagaz y de 
buenos medios y que se hiziese muy ser- 
vidor del narbaez E que se mostrase favo- 
rable a su parte mas que no a la de Cortez 
E que secretamente conbocase al artillero 
que se dezia rrodrigo martin e a otro arti- 
llero que se dezia vsagre E que hablase con 
andres de duero para que vinyese a berse 
con cortez e que otra carta que escribiamos 
al narbaez que mirase que se la diese en 
sus manos E lo que en tal casso conbenia e 
tubiese mucha adverten^ia e para esto lle- 
bo muchantidad de texuelos e cadenas de 
oro para rrepartir 




jUES como ya estabamos En aquel pueblo todos juntos 
acordamos que con el padre de la merged se escribie- 
se otra carta al narbaez que dezia en ella ansy o otras 
palabras formales como estas despues de puesto su acato con 
gran cortesia, que nos abiamos holgado de su benida e creia- 
mo8 que con su generosa persona hariamos gran servi^io a 

Bernal Dlax del QastUlo -49. 



378 

dios nro senor e a su mag e que no nos ha querido rrespon- 
der cosa ninguna, antes nos llama de traidores syendo muy 
leales serbidores del rrey e ha rrebuelto toda la tierra con las 
palabras que envio a dezir a moteguma E que le enbio cortes 
a pedir por merged que escogiese la probingia que En qual- 
quyera parte que quisiese quedar con la gente que tiene o 
fuese adelante E que nosotros yriamos a otras tierras e ha- 
riamos lo que buenos sbidores de su mag somos obligados 
E que le hemos pedido por merged que sy trae probisyo- 
nes de su magestad que enbie los originales para ber y en- 
thender sy bienen con la rreal firma e que es lo que En 
ellas se contiene para que luego q lo beamos los pechos por 
tierra obedesgerla, E que no ha querido hager lo vno ny lo 
otro syno tratarnos mal de palabra e rrebolver la tierra/ que 
le pedimos e Requerimos de parte de Dios y del rrey nro s 
que dentro En tres dias ebie a notificar los despachos que 
trae con escribano de su mag E que lo cunpliremos como 
mandado de nro rrey e sefior todo lo que en las Reales pro- 
bisyones mandare que para aquel efecto nos emos venydo a 
aquel pueblo de panguenequyta por estar mas gerca de su 
rreal, E que sy no trae las probisyones e se quysyere bolber 
a Cuba que se buelba e no alborote mas la tierra con protesta- 
gion que sy otra cosa haze que yremos contra el a le prender 
y enbiallo preso a nro rrey e sefior pues syn su rreal ligengia 
nos viene a dar guerra e desasosegar todas las giudades E que 
todos los males e muertes e fuegos y menoscabos que sobre 
esto acaesgieren que sea a su cargo e no al nro y esto se escribe 
agora por carta mensiba porque no osa ningun escribano de 
su mag yrselo a notificar por themor no les acaesca el gran 
desacato como el que se tubo con vn oydor de su mag y q 
donde se bio tal atrebimiento de le ebiar preso E que aliende 
de lo que dho tiene por lo que es obligado a la honrra e 
justigia de nro rrey que le conbiene castigar aquel gran des- 
acato e delito como capitan general e justigia mayor que es 
de esta nueba espafia le gita y enplaza para ello y se lo de- 
mandara vsando de justigia pues es crimen lege magestatis 
en lo q a tratado E que hace a dios testigo de lo que agora di- 



879 

ze/. y tanbien le Enbio a dezir que luego bolviese al cajique 
gordo las mantas e Ropa e joyas de oro que le abian tornado 
por fuerga e ansymysmo las hijas de sefiores que nos abian 
dado sus padres e mandase a sus soldados que no rrobasen a 
los yndios de aquel pueblo ny de otros e despues de puesto 
su cortesia e firmada de cortez e de nros capitanes e algunos 
soldados yba alii my firma y entonges se fue con el mysmo 
frayle vn soldado que se dezia bartholome de vsagre porque 
era hermano del artillero vsagre que thenia cargo de la ar- 
tilleria de narbaez y llegados nro rreligioso y el vsagre a §en- 
poal a donde estaba el narbaez dire lo que dizque paso/ . 



CAPITULO CXVIL como el fraile de la 
merged fue a genpoal donde estaba el nar- 
baez e todos sus capitanes e lo que paso 
Con ellos e les dio la carta 

como el frayle de la merged llego al rreal de narbaez sin yo 
gastar mas palabras en tornallo a rregitar hizo lo que cortes 
le mando que fue convocar a giertos Caballeros de los de 
narbaez e al artillero Rodrigo martin que ansi se llamava e 
al vsagre que thenia tanbien cargo de los tiros y para mejor 
le atraer fue su hermano del vgagre con texuelos de oro que 
dio de secreto al hermano e ansy mysmo Repartio el frayle 
todo el oro que cortes le mando e hablo al andres de duero 
que luego se viniese a nro rreal a berse con cortez y demas 
desto ya el frayle abia ydo a ber e hablar al narvaez e ha- 
zersele muy grand sbidor e andando En estos pasos tubieron 
gran sospecha de lo en que andaba nro fraj^le e aconsejaban 
al narbaez que luego le prendiese e ansy lo queria hazer y 
como lo supo andres de duero que hera secret*^ del diego ve- 
lasquez y hera de tudela de duero y thenianse por deudos el 
narbaez y el porque el narbaez tanbien hera de tierra de va- 
lladolid o del mismo valladolid y en toda la armada era muy 



880 

estimado e premynente el andres de duero fue al narbaez y 
le dixo que le abian dho que queria prender al fraile de la 
merged mensagero y enbaxador de cortes que myrase que ya 
que se tubiese sospecha que el frayle hablaba algunas cosas 
En fabor del cortes que no es bien prendelle pues que clara- 
mente se ha bisto quanta honrra e dadibas da cortes a todos 
los suyos del narbaez que alia van e que el fraile ha habla- 
do con el despues que alii ha benido e lo que siente del es 
que desea quel y otros Caballeros del rreal de cortes le ven- 
gan a rregebir e que todos fuesea amigos e que mire quanto 
bien dize cortes a los mensageros q enbia que no le sale per 
la boca a el ny a quantos con el estan sino el senor capitan 
narbaez e que seria poquedad prender a vn Religioso E que 
otro honbre que bino con el que es hermano de vsagre el ar- 
tillero q le biene a ver q conbide al fraile a comer e le saque 
del pecho la boluntad que todos los de cortez tienen, e con 
aquellas palabras e otras sabrosas que le dixo amanso al nar- 
baez y luego desque esto paso se despidio andres de duero 
del narbaez y secretamente hablo al padre lo que abia psado 
y luego el narbaez ebio a llamar al fraile e como bino le hizo 
mucho acato y el frayle medio rriendo que hera muy cuer- 
do y sagaz, le suplico que se apartase en secreto y el narbaez 
se fue con el paseando a vn patio y el fraile le dixo bien en- 
thendido thengo que vra md me queria mandar prender pues 
hagole saber senor que no tiene mejor ny mayor svidor en 
su rreal que yo e thenga por gierto que muchos Caballeros e 
capitanes de los de cortez le querrian ya ber en manos de 
vra md e ansi creo que vernemos todos e para mas le atraer 
a que se descongiferte le ban hecho escribir vna carta de des- 
barios firmada de los soldados que me dieron que diese a vra 
md que no la he querido mostrar hasta agora que viene a 
platicas que en vn rrio la quise echar por las nesgedades que 
En ella trae y esto hazen sus capitanes e soldados de cortes 
por verle ya descon§ertar y el narbaez dixo que se la diese y 
el fraile dixo que la dexo En su posada E que yria por ella 
e ansi se despidio para yr por la carta y entretanto vino al 
aposento de narbaez el braboso salbatierra y de presto el fray- 



881 

le llamo a duero que fuese luego En casa del narbaez para 
dalle la carta que bien sabia ya el duero della e avn otros 
capitanes de narbaez q se abian mostrado por cortez porque 
el frayle consygo la tray a syno porque estubiesen juntos mu- 
chos de los de aquel Real e la oyesen. e luego como bino el 
frayle gon la carta se la dio al mysmo narbaez e dixo no se 
maraville .v. md con ella que ya cortez anda desbariando y 
se gierto que sy bra md le habla con amor que luego se le 
dara el e todos los que consygo trae /. dexemos de rrazones 
del frayle que las thenia muy buenas e digamos que le di- 
xeron a narbaez los soldados y Capitanes que leyese la carta 
e desque la oyeron dizque hazian bramuras el narbaez y el 
salbatierra los demas se rreyan como haziendo burla della y 
enton^es dixo el andres de duero agora yo no se como sea 
esto yo no lo entiendo porque este rreligioso me ha dho que 
cortes e todos se le darian a bra md y escribir agora estos 
desvarios y luego de buena tynta tanbien le ayudo al duero 
vn agustin bermudez que hera capitan e alguazil mayor del 
rreal de narbaez e dixo giertamente tanbien he sabido de es- 
te frayle de la merged muy en secreto que como ebiase bue- 
nos tergeros que el mysmo cortes vemia a berse con .v. md 
para que se diese con sus soldados y sera bien que enbie a su 
rreal pues no esta muy lejos al senor beedor salbatierra e al 
senor andres de duero o yo yre con ellos y esto dixo adrede 
por ver que diria el salbatierra e luego dixo el narbaez que- 
fuese el andres de duero y salbatierra Respondio el salbatie- 
rra que estava mal dispuesto E que no yria a ber a vn tray- 
dor y el frayle le dixo sefior veedor bueno es thener tenplan- 
9a pues esta §ierto que le terneis preso antes de muchos dias 
pues congertada la partida del andres de duero paresge ser 
muy en secreto trato el narbaez con el mysmo duero e con 
tres capitanes que tubiese manera con el cortes como se bie- 
sen en vnas estangias E casas de yndios que estaban entre el 
Real de narbaez y el nro e que alii se darian congiertos don- 
de abiamos de yr con cortez a poblar y partir terminos y en 
las vistas le prenderia y para ello tenia ya hablado el nar- 
baez a veynte soldados de sus amigos lo qual luego supo el 



882 

fraile e ansi mysmo el andres de duero e avisaron a cortes 
de todo/. dexemos al frayle En el rreal de narbaez que ya 
se abia hecho muy amigo e pariente del salbatierra syendo el 
frayle de olmedo y el salvatierra de burgos e comio con 
el, e digamos de andres de duero que quedaba apersibiendo- 
se para yr a nro rreal e llevar consygo a bartholome de vsa- 
gre nro soldado porque narbaez no alCangase a saber del lo 
que pasaba e dire lo que en nro rreal hezimos /. 



CAPITULO CXVIIL Como en nro Real 
hezimos alarde de los soldados que era- 
mos e como traxeron dozientas e (^inquen- 
ta picas muy largas con dos hierros de co- 
bre cada vna que cortez abia mandado 
hazer en vnos pueblos que se dizen los 
chinantecas e nos inponyamos como abia- 
mos de jugar dellas para derrocar la gen- 
te de a caballo que tenia narbaez y otras 
cosas que en el rreal pasaron/. 

bolbamos a dezir algo atras de lo dieho lo que mas paso / . 
ansy como cortez tubo noti§ia de la armada que traya nar- 
baez luego despacho vn soldado que abia estado En ytalia 
bien diestro de todas armas y mas de Jugar de vna pica y le 
enbio a vna probinjia que se dize los chinantecas junto a 
donde estaban nros soldados los que fueron a buscar mynas 
porque aquellos de aquella probinyia heran muy enemigos 
de los mexicanos e pocos Dias abia que tomaron nra amys- 
tad e vsavan por armas muy grandes langas mayores que las 
nras de Casti* con dos bragas de pedernal e nabajas y enbio- 
les a rrogar que luego le truxesen a doquiera que estubiese 



883 

trezientas dellas e que les quitasen las nabajas E que pues the- 
nian mucho Cobre que les hiziesen a cada vna dos hierros y 
llebo el soldado la manera que habian de ser los yerros e co- 
mo luego de presto buscaron las lan§as e hizieron los hie- 
rros porque en toda la probingia a aquella sazon heran qua- 
tro o (jinco pueblos syn muehas estangias las Recogieron e 
hizieron los hierros muy mas perfectamente que se los ebia- 
mos a mandar e tanbien mando a nro soldado q se dezia to- 
billa que les demandase dos mill honbres de gerra E que pa 
el dia de pasqua de espiritu santo binyesen con ellos al pue- 
blo de panganequyta q ansi se dezia o que preguntase en que 
parte estabamos e que los dos mill honbres truxesen lanyas 
por manera que el soldado se los demando e los ca§iques di- 
xeron que ellos bernian con la gente de guerra y el soldado 
se vino luego con obra de dozientos yndios que trajeron las 
lanyas e con los demas yndios de guerra quedo para benyr 
con ellos otro soldado de los nros que se dezia barrientos y 
este barrientos estaba en la estaingia e mynas q descubrian ya 
por mi otra vez memoradas e alii se con9erto que abia de be- 
nir de la manera que esta dho a nro rreal porque seria de an- 
dadura diez o do§e leguas de lo vno a lo otro, pues venido 
nro soldado tovilla con las lan^as heran muy extremadas de 
buenas e alii se daba horden y nos ynponia el soldado e 
amostraba a jugar con ellas e como nos abiamos de aber con 
los de a Caballo e ya theniamos hecho nro alarde e Copia y 
memoria de todos los soldados e Capitanes de nro exer§ito e 
hallamos dozientos e sesenta e seis contados atanbor e pi- 
fano sin el fraile e con §inco de a caballo e dos tirillos e po- 
cos ballesteros y menos escopeteros y a lo que tuvimos ojo 
para pelear con narbaez eran las picas e fueron muy buenas 
como adelante beran e dexemos de armas en el alarde e lan- 
§as, e dire como llego andres de duero que ebio narbaez a 
nro rreal e truxo consigo a nro soldado vsagre e dos yndios 
naborias de cuba e lo que dixeron y congertaron cortes y due- 
ro segund despues alCan^amos a saber 



884 



CAPITULO CXVIl [CXIX] Como vino an- 
dres de duero a nro rreal y el soldado vsa- 
gre y dos yndios de Cuba naborias del due- 
ro^ y quien Era El duero, y a lo que venia, 
y lo que tuvimos por }ierto y lo que se, 
Concerto. — 

y Es desta manera que tengo de bolver .muy Atras A rre9i- 
tar lo pasado, ya E dho En el capitulo muy atras paaado, 
que quando Estavamos En Santiago de Cuba, que se concer- 
to cortes con andres de duero y con vn contador del rrey, 
que se dezia amador, de lares, que Eran grandes amigos del 
diego Velazquez, y el duero Era su secretario que tratase con 
el diego velazquez, q le hiziesen A cortes Capitan general 
para venir En aquella Armada, y que partiria Con ellos to- 
do El oro y plata y joyas que le cupiese de su parte de Cor- 
tes, y como El andres de duero vio En aquel ynstante A 
cortes su conpanero tan rrico y poderoso, y so color que venia 
A poner pages y a favores§er A narvaez, En lo que Entendio 
Era demandar, la parte de la conpania, porq ya El otro su 
conpanero Amador de lares Era falles§ido y como cortes Era 
sagaz y mafioso no solamente le prometio de dalle gran te- 
soro, sino q tanbien le daria mando En toda la armada, ni 
mas ni menos q su propia persona, y q despues de conquis- 
tada la nueva espafia, le daria otros tantos pueblos Como a 
el con tal que tuviese con§ierto Con agustin bermudez que 
Era Alguazil mayor del rreal de narvaez y con otros Cava- 
lleros que aqui no nonbro, questavan convocados para que 
En todo caso fuesen En desviar al narvaez para q no saliese 
con la vida E Con honrra y le desbaratase, y como a narvaez 
tuviese muerto o preso y deshecho a su armada q Ellos qda- 
rian por senores y partirian El oro y pueblos de la nueva es- 



385 

pana, y para mas le atraer y convocar A lo q dho tengo le 
cargo de oro sus dos yndios de Cuba, y segun pares^io El due- 
ro se lo prometio, y avn ya se lo tenia prometido El agustin 
bermudez por firmas y cartas y tanbien Enbio cortes Al ber- 
mudez y a vn clerigo q se dezia Joan de leon y el clerigo 
guevara q fue el q primero enbio narbaez y otros sus amigos 
muchos tejuelos y joyas de oro, y les Escrivio lo q le pares5io 
q convenia, para que En todo le ayudasen, y estuvo El an- 
dres de duero En nro rreal El dia que Uego hasta otro dia 
despues de comer q Era dia de pasqua del espiritu santo, y co- 
mio con cortes y estuvo hablando En secreto vn rrato, y des- 
que ovieron comido, se despidio El duero de todos nosotros 
Asi Capitanes Como soldados, y luego fue a cavallo otra vez, 
adonde Cortes estava, y dixo, q manda .v. m, que me quiero 
partir, y rrespondiole, que vaya con dios, y mire sefior an- 
dres de duero q aya buen Congierto de lo q tenemos platica- 
do, si no. En mi Conciencia, que ansi Jurava Cortes, q antes 
de tres dias con todos mis conpaneros, sere alia En vro rreal, 
y al primero q le heche la lan§a sera A .v. m, si otra Cosa 
siento Al contrario de lo q tenemos hablado, y el duero se 
rrio, y dixo, no faltare En cosa q sea contrario de servir A 
.V. m, y luego se fue, y llegado A su rreal dizque dixo al nar- 
vaez q cortes y todos los q Estavaraos Con el, sentia estar de 
buena voluntad para pasarnos con el mesmo narvaez. dexe- 
mos de hablar desto del duero, y dire como Cortes luego 
mando llamar a vn nro Capitan q se dezia Joan velazquez 
de leon, persona de mucha quenta, y amigo de Cortes, y Era 
pariente muy gercano del governador de Cuba diego velaz- 
quez, y a lo q sienpre tuvimos Creydo tanbien le tenia Cor- 
tes convocado y atraydo a si. Con grandes dadivas y ofresgi- 
mientos q le daria mando En la nueva espafia y le haria su 
igual, porquel Juan velazquez, sienpre se mostro su muy 
gran servidor y berdadero Amigo, Como adelante beran, y 
desq ovo venido delante de cortes y hecho su acato, le di- 
xo, q manda .v. m, y como Cortes hablava Algunas vezes 
muy melioso, ycon la rrisa En la boca le dixo medio rrien- 
do, a lo q al senor Juan velazquez le hize llamar Es q me 

Bemal DSas del CftstlJlo— 50. 



386 

A dho andres de duero, q dize narvaez, y En todo su rreal 
Ay fama, que si .v. m va Alia que luego yo soy deshecho y 
desbaratado, porq creen q se a de hazer con el narvaez y a 
esta cavsa E acordado, q por mi vida, si bien me quereys, 
que luego vaya En su buena yegua rrugia, y que lleve todo 
su oro y la fanfarrona, q era muy pesada cadena de oro, y 
otras cositas q yo le dare q de alia por mi A quien yo le di- 
xese y su fanfarrona q pesa mucho llevara al vn honbro, y 
btra cadena que pesa mas que Ella llevara cenida con dos 
vueltas, y alia vera que le quiere narvaez y En viniendo q 
se venga luego, yra alia El senor diego de ordas, q le desean 
ver En su rreal, Como mayordomo q era del di^ belazqz, y 
el Joan velazquez rrespondio quel haria lo que su md man- 
dava, mas que sti oro y cadenas q no las llevaria consigo, 
salvo lo q le diese para dar a quien madase porq donde su 
persona estubiese, Es para le sienpre servir, mas q quanto 
oro ni piedras de diamantes puede aber. Ansi lo tengo yo 
creydo, dixo Cortes, y con esta confianga, sefior, le Enbio, 
mas si no lleva todo su oro y Joyas, como le mando, no quie- 
ro que vaya Alia, y El Joan velazquez rrespondio, hagase lo 
q .V. m mandare e no quiso llevar sus joyas, alii le hablo cor- 
tes secretamente y luego se partio y llebo En su conpaiiia a 
vn mogo despuelas de cortes para q le sirviese, q se dezia 
Joan del rrio. y dexemos desta partida de Joan velazquez, 
que dixeron q le enbio cortes por descuydar a narvaez, y bol- 
vamos a dezir lo q En nro rreal paso, q dende a dos oras q 
se partio El Joan velazqz, mando cortes tocar El atanbor, A 
canillas, q Ansi se llamava nro atanbor y a benito de beger, 
hro pifano, q tocase su tanborino e mado a gongalo de san- 
doval, q Era capitan y alguazil mayor, para q llamase A 
todos los soldados, y comengasemos A march ar luego, A pa- 
so largo camino de genpoal E yendo por nro camino, se ma- 
taron dos puercos de la tierra, que tienen El onbligo En el 
espinazo y diximos muchos soldados, q Era serial de vitoria 
y dormimos En vn rrepecho gerca de vn rriachuelo, y nros 
eorredores del canpo adelante y espias y rrondas, y desq 
amanesgio Caminamos por nro camino derecho y fuymos A 



88? 

ora de medio dia, A sestear a vn rrio A donde Esta agora po- 
blada la villa rrica de la veracruz, donde desEnbarcan las 
varcas con mercaderias, q vienen de castilla, porq En aquel 
tienpo estavanpobladas junto al rrio, ynas casas de yndios, 
E arboledas, y como En aqlla trra haze grandisimo sol, rre- 
posamos como dho tengo porq trayamos nras armas e picas, 
y dexemos agora de mas Caminar y digamos lo q al Juan 
Velazquez de leon le A vino con narvaez y con vn su capitan 
q tanbien se dezia diego velazquez, sobrino del velazquez go- 
vernador de cuba porq alia topo co el/. 



CAPITULO CXX Como llego Jvan velaz- 
quez de leon e vn mocjo despuelas de Cor- 
tes q se dezia Joan del rrio,- al rreal de 
narvaez, y lo que En el paso. 

ya E dho como Enbio Cortes a Jvan velazquez de leon y al 
mo^o despuelas para q le aconpanase A §enpoal, y a ver lo 
que narvaez le qria, q tanto deseo tenia de tenello En su 
conpania, por man era, q asi como partieron de nro freal 
se dio tanta priesa En el camino, q fue Amanesger A'§en- 
poal, y se fue Apear El Jvan velazquez, En casa del Ca§iq 
gordo porquel Joan del rrio no tenia Caballo, y desde alii 
se yvan a pie a la posada del narvaez, pues como los yndios 
le cono§ieron, holgaron de le ver y hablar y dezian A bozes 
a vnos soldados de narvaez q alii posaban En casa del caciq 
gordo, q aquel Era Joan velazquez de leon, capitan de ma- 
linche, y asi como los oyeron los soldados fueron corriendo 
a demandar albri^ias a narvaez Como abia benido ju° velaz- 
qz de leon y antes quel Juan velazquez llegase a la posada 
del narvaez y como de rrepente supo el narvaez su venida, 
le salio A resgebir A la calle, Aconpanado de §iertos solda- 
dos, dondase Encontraron El Juan velazquez y el' narvaez 



y se hizieron muy grandes acatos, y el narvaez abra§o al Jvan 
Velazquez, y le mando sentar En vna silla, que luego truxe- 
ro sillas y asentaderos §erca de si, y le dixo q por que no se 
fue Apear A su posada, y mando a sus criados q le fuesen 
luego por el cavallo y fardaxe, si llevava para q En su casa 
e su caballeriza y posada Estaria, y Joan velazquez dixo q 
luego se qria bolver, q no venia sino a besalle las manos, y 
a todos los caballeros de su rreal y para ver si podia dar con- 
§ierto q su md y Cortes tuviesen paz, y amistad. Enton^es 
dizque luego El narvaez Aparto al Juan velazquez, muy 
Ayrado como q tales palabras le abia de dezir, tener Amis- 
tad y paz Con vn traydor, que se algo A su primo diego ve- 
lazquez con la armada, y el Juan velazquez rrespondio, q 
Cortes no Era traydor, sino buen servidor de su magestad, 
y q ocurrir a nro rrey y sefior, como Enbio, no se le ha de 
atribuyr a traygion, y q le suplica q delante del, no se diga 
tal palabra, y Enton^es El narvaez le comengo A convocar 
con grandes prometimientos, q se quedase con el, y q con- 
^ierte con los de cortes que se le diesen y vengan luego A se 
meter En su obidiengia, prometiendole Con juramentos que 
seria En todo su rreal El mas preminente capitan y En el 
mando segunda persona, y el Joan velazquez rrespondio, q 
mayor trayyion haria El dexar al capitan q tiene Jurado En 
la guerra, y desmanparalle conogiendo q En todo lo q a he- 
cho En la nueva espafia Es En servigio de dios nro sefior y 
de su magestad q no dexar ocurrir cortes como ocurrio a nro 
rrey y senor y q le suplica q no le hable mas En ello. En 
aquella sazon abian venido a ver a Jvan velazquez, todos los 
mas pringipales Capitanes del rrl de narvaez y le abrayavan 
con gran cortesia porquel Juan velazqz Era muy del palayio 
y buen cuerpo, menbrudo, y buena presengia y rrostro, y la 
barba bien puesta, y llebava vna cadena muy grande de oro 
Echada al onbro q le dava dos vueltas debajo del bra§o, pa- 
resgiale muy bien como bravoso y buen capitan dexemos del 
buen pares§er de Juan velazquez y como lestavan mirando 
todos los capitanes de narvaez, y avn nro frayle de la md 
tanbien le bino aver y En secreto hablar, y ansi* mismo EI 



andres de duero y el alguazil mayor bermudez pares§io ser 
q En aquel ynstante 5iertos capitanes de narvaez q se dezian 
gamarra, y vn Jvan fuste y vn Jvan bono de quexo vizcayno 
y salvatierra El bravoso/. Aconsexaron a narvaez, que lue- 
go prendiesen al Jvan velazquez porq les paresgio q hablava 
muy sueltamente En fabor de cortes, E ya q abia mandado 
El narvaez secretamente a sus capitanes y alguaziles q le 
echasen preso, supolo agustin bermudez y el andres de duero 
y nro frayle de la md, y vn clerigo q se dezia Jvan de leon, y 
otras personas de las q se avian dado por amigos de cortes 
y dizen al narvaez q se maravillan de su md qrer mandar 
prender al ju® velazquez de leon que que puede hazer cortes 
contra el avnq tenga en su conpania otros Qient Juan ve- 
lazquez y q mire la honrra y acatos q haze Cortes a todos 
los que DE su Real an ydo, q les sale a rres(;ebir y a todos 
les da oro y Joyas y vienen cargados Como abejas a las col- 
menas y de otras cosas de mantas y mosqueadores, y q a 
andres de duero y al clerigo guevara y amaya y a vergara 
El escrivano, E a aP de mata y a otros q an ydo a su rreal, 
bien los pudiera prender y no lo hizo, antes como dho tie- 
nen, les haze mucha honrra y q sera mejor que le tome a 
hablar al ju*^ belazqz Con mucha cortesia y le conbide A co- 
mer, por manera, quel narvaez le paresgio buen Consejo, y 
luego le torno a hablar con palabras muy amorosas, para que 
fuese ter§ero en q cortes se le diese con todos nosotros, y le 
conbido A comer y El Jvan velazquez rrespondio q haria lo 
que pudiese En aquel caso mas q tenia a cortes por muy por- 
fiado y cabegudo En aquel negogio, y q seria mejor partiesen 
las provin§ias y quescoxiese la tierra q mas su md quisiese. 
y esto dezia El Juan velazquez por le amansar. Entre aque- 
lias platicas llegose al oydo de narvaez El frayle de la md y 
dixole como su privado y consejero q ya se le avia hecho, 
mande .v. md hazer alarde toda su artilleria y caballeros y 
escopeteros y vallesteros y soldados para q lo vea el Juan ve- 
lazquez de leon y el mo§o despuelas Jvan del rrio, para q 
cortes tema vros poderes E gentes y se venga a .v. m avnq 
le pese y 'Esto le dixo el fraile como por via de su muy gran 



S90 

servidor y amigo, y por hazelle q trabajasen todos los de ca- 
ballo y soldados En su rreal, por manera, q por El dho de 
nro frayle, hizo hazer alarde delante el Juan velazquez 
de leon y de Juan del rrio, estando presente nro rreligioso y 
desque fue Acabado de hazer dixo El Juan velazquez a nar- 
vaez gran puJan§a trae .v. m dios se lo Acresgiente. Enton- 
5es dixo El narvaez, ay vera .v. m q si quisiera Aber ydo 
contra cortes, le oviera traydo preso y a quantos estays con 
el. Entonges rrespondio El Juan velazquez y dixo, tengale 
.V. m por tal, y a los soldados q con el Estamos que sabre- 
mos muy bien defender nras personas, y ansi gesaron las pla- 
ticas/. E otro dia llebole conbidado a Comer Al Juan velaz- 
quez y comia con el narvaez yn sobrino del diego velazquez, 
governador de cuba, q tanbien Era su capitan, y estando co- 
miendo, tratose platica de como cortes no se daba Al narvaez 
y de la carta y rrequirimiento q le Enbio, y de vnas pala- 
bras a otras desmandose El sobrino del diego velazquez, que 
tanbien se dezia diego velazquez como el tyo, E dixo que 
Cortes y todos los que con el estavamos Eramos traydores, 
pues no se venian a someter al narvaez, y el Juan velazquez 
desque lo oyo, se lebanto de la silla En questava y con mu- 
cho Acato dixo, sefior Capitan narvaez, ya E suplicado a .v. 
m q no consiento q se digan palabras tales como estas q di- 
xo de cortes, ni de niiiguno de los q con el Estamos, porq 
verdaderamente son mal dichas, dezir mal de nosotros q tan 
lealmente Emos servido a su magestad. y el diego velazquez, 
rrespondio q Eran bien dichas y pues bolvia por vn traydor. 
E traydores debia de ser otro tal como el, y q no Era de los 
velazquez de los buenos. y el Juan velazquez hechando ma- 
no A su espada, E dixo q mentia y q Era mexor caballero 
q no el, y de los buenos velazquez mejor q no el ni su tio, 
y q se lo haria conosyer, si el sefior capitan narvaez les dava 
ligengia, y como abia alii muchos capitanes, Ansi de los de 
narvaez y algunos amigos de los de cortes, se metieron En- 
medio, q de hecho le yva a dar el juan velazq:? yna Estocada 
y aconseJaron al narvaez, q luego le mandase salir de su rreal, 
ansi a el Como al frayle, E a joan del rrio, porq a lo q sen- 



391 

• 

tian, no hazian provecho ningiiiio, y luego, sin mas dilation 
les mandaron q se fuesen, y ellos, q no vian la ora de ver- 
se En nro rreal, lo pusieron por obra. E dizque El Jvan ve- 
lazquez, yendo A caballo En su buena yegua, y su cota pues- 
ta, q sienpre andava con ella, y con su capagete y gra cadena 
de oro, se fue a despedir del narvaez, y estava alii con el nar- 
vaez El man§ebo diego velazquez el de la brega E dixo al 
narbaez, q manda .v. m para nro rreal, rrespondio El nar- 
vaez muy EnoJado, q se fuese, E q valiera mas q no oviera 
venido, y dixo el ma§ebo di** velazqz palabras de amena§a e 
injuriosas a ju® belazqz, y le rrespondio a ellas el ju® belaz- 
qz de leon q es grade su atrevimiento y dino de Castigo por 
aquellas palabras que le dixo, y hechandose mano a las bar- 
bas para Estas que yo vea antes de muclios dias, si vro es- 
fuer^o es tanto como vro hablar, y como venian con el Joan 
velazquez, seys o siete de los del rreal del narvaez, q ya es- 
tavan cobocados por cortes, que lo yVan a despedir, dizen 
que travaron del coino Enojados, y le dixeron vayase ya y 
no cure de mas hablar y ansi se despidieron, y a buen andar 
de sus cavallos, se van para nro rreal, porq luego les abisa- 
ron a ju® velazqz quel narvaez los queria prender y Aper^e- 
bia muchos de cavallo q fuesen tras Ellos e biniendo su 
camino nos Encontraron al rrio q dicho tengo questa agora 
cabe la veracruz — Estando qstavamos En el rrio por mi ya 
nonbrado, teniendo la siesta, porq En aquella trra haze muy 
rrezio calor, porq Como caminavamos con todas nras Armas 
A cuestas, y cada vno con vna pica, Estavamos cansados, y 
En este ynstante vino vno de nros corredores del canpo A 
dar man dado a Cortes q vian venir buen rrato de alii, dos o 
tres personas de a caballo, y luego presumimos q serian nros 
EnbaJadores Juan velazquez de leon y el frayle y Juan del 
rrio, y como llegaron a donde estavamos, que rreg09ijos y ale- 
grias tuvimos todos y cortes quantas Carigias y buenos co- 
medimientos hizo al Juan velazquez y a nro frayle y tenia 
mucha rrazon porq le fueron muy servidores y alii conto El 
Joan velazquez paso por paso, todo lo por mi atras dho, q 
les Acaesgio con narvaez, y como Enbio secretamente a dar 



392 

las cadenas y tejuelos y joyas de oro, a las personas q cortes 
man do pues oyr a nro frayle, como era muy regogijado sa- 
bialo muy bien representar como se hizo muy servidor del 
narvaez, y que por hazer burla del le aconsejo q hiziese El 
alarde, y sacase su artilleria y con q astugia e mafias le dio 
la carta, pues quando contava lo q le acaesyio con el salba- 
tierra y se le hizo muy pariente siendo El frayle de olmedo 
y el salbatierra delante de burgos y de los fieros q le dezia 
el salvatrra q abia de hazer y acontes§er, En prendiendo A 
cortes y A todos nosotros y avn se le quexo de los soldados 
que le hurtaron su caballo y el de otro Capitan, y todos nos- 
otros nos holgavamos de lo oyr, como si fueramos a bodas y 
rrego^fijos, y sabiamos q otro dia aviamos de Entrar En ba- 
tallafi y q aviamos de venger o morir En ellas, siendo como 
Eramos dozientos y sesenta y seys soldados, y los de nar- 
vaez 9inco vezes mas, que nosotros y bolvamos a nra rrela- 
$ion, y es q luego todos caminamos para §enpoal, y fuymos 
a dormir a vn rriachuelo a donde Estava en aquella sazon 
vna puente obra de vna legua de ^enpoal, A donde Esta Ago- 
ra vna estangia de vacas. y dexallo E aqui, y dire lo q se hi- 
zo En el rreal de narvaez despues q se vinieron El Joan ve- 
lazquez y el frayle y Juan del rrio y luego bolvere a contar 
lo q hizimos En el nro rreal porq En vn ynstante Acontes- 
ye dos y tres Cosas y por fuer§a E de dexar las vnas por con- 
tar lo q mas viene a proposito desta rrela5ion. 



CAPITULO CXXI. de lo q se hizo En el 
rreal de narvaez, despues q de alii salieron 
nros Enbajadores — 

paresgio ser que como se vinieron El Joan velazquez y el 
frayle y el Joan del rrio, dixeron al narvaez sus capitanes q 
En su rreal sentian q cortes abia Enbiado muchas Joyas de 
oro, y q tenia de su parte amigos, En el mismo rreal, y que 



393 

seria bien Estar muy Aper§ebido, y avisase a todos sus sol- 
dados questuviesen con sus armas y caballos prestos y demas 
desto, El cagique gordo, otras vezes por mi memorado, temia 
muchp A cortes porq avia consentido q narvaez tomase las 
mantas y oro, y yndias q le tomo, y sienpre tenia Espias so- 
bre nosotros, En q parte dorraiamos, y por q camino venia- 
mos porq asi se lo avia m^*^ por fuer§a el narvaez, y corao 
supo q ya llegavamos ^erca de genpoal, le dixo a narvaez el 
ca5iq gordo, que hazeys questays muy descuydado, pensays 
que malinche y los tevles q trae consigo q son ansi como vo- 
sotros, pues yos digo que quando no os cataredes, sera Aqui 
y OS matara, y avnq hazian burla de aquellas palabras q el 
Ca§iq gordo les dixo, no dexaron de se apergebir, y la pri- 
mera cosa q hizieron fue pregonar guerra contra nosotros, a 
fuego y sangre y A toda rropa. franca lo cual supimos de vn 
soldado q llamavan El galleguillo q se bino huyendo del 
rreal de narvaez, o le Enbio El andres de duero, dio aviso A 
cortes de lo del pregon, y de otras cosas q conbino saber, 
bolvamos A narvaez que luego mando sacar toda su artille- 
ria y los de cavallo y escopeteros, y vallesteros, a vn canpo 
obra de vn quarto de legua de §enpoal para alii nos aguar- 
dar y no dexar ninguno de nosotros q no fuese muerto o 
preso, y como llovio mucho Aquel dia, Estaban ya los de 
narvaez hartos destar aguardandonos al agua y como no es- 
tavan Acostunbrados a aguas ni trabajos, e no nos tenia en 
nada, sus capitanes le aconsejaron q se bolviesen a los apo- 
sentos y q Era afrenta estar alii como estavan aguardando a 
dos tres y es q dezian q Eramos, y q Asestase su artilleria 
delante de sus aposentos q eran XVIII tiros gruesos y ques- 
tuviesen toda la noche quarenta de cavallo esperando En el 
camino por donde aviamos de yr a genpoal y que tuviese al 
pasar del rrio, q era por donde aviamos de benyr, sus espias 
q fuesen buenos honbres de a cavallo e peones ligeros para 
dar mandado, y q En los patios de los aposentos del narvaez 
anduviesen toda la noche veynte de caballo, y este congier- 
to q le dieron, fue por hazelle bolver a los aposentos, y mas 
le dezian sus capitanes pues como sefior, por tal tiene a cor- 

Bemal Dlas del QastUlo.— 51, 



894 

tes, q se A de Atrever, q con tres gatos q tiene A de venir A 
este rreal por el dho deste yndio gordo, no lo crea .v. m sine 
q A hecho aquellas algaradas y muestras de venir, porq .v. 
m venga a buen con§ierto con el. por manera q ansi como 
dho tengo, se bolvio narbaez a su rreal y despues de buelto 
publicamente prometio que quien matase A cortes o A gon- 
§alo de Sandoval, que le daria dos mill pesos y luego puso 
espias al rrio A vn gongalo carrasco, que bive agora En la 
puebla, y el otro se dezia hulano hurtado, y el nonbre y ape- 
llido y seiial secreta q dio quando batallasen contra nosotros 
En su rreal, avia de ser santa maria santa maria y demas 
deste con^ierto q tenian hecho, mando narvaez que En su 
aposento durmiesen muchos soldados, Asi Escopeteros Como 
vallesteros y otros Con partesanas y otro tanto mando qstu- 
viesen En el aposento del beedor de salvatierra y gamarra e 
de ju*^ bono, ya E dho El conyierto q tenia narvaez En su 
rreal y bolvere a dezir la orden q se dio En el nro. 



C APITULO CXXII. Del coiKjierto y orden q 
se dio En nro Real para yr contra narvaez y 
del rrazonamiento q cortes nos hizo, y lo q 
le rrespondimos, 

llegados q fuemos Al rriachuelo q ya E dho y memorado, 
questara obra de vna legua de §enpoal y abia alii vnos bue- 
nos prados, y despues de aver Enbiado nros corredores del 
canpo personas de confianga, nro capitan cortes A caballo, 
nos Enbio a llamar ansi Capitanes como a todos los solda- 
dos, y desque nos vio Juntos, nos dixo, q nos pedia por md 
q callasemos y luego comen§o vn parlamento por tan lindo 
estilo y platica tan bien dichas yierto otra mas sabrosa y He- 
na de ofertas q yo aqui [no] sabre Escrebir En q nos truxo 
luego a la memoria desde q salimos de la ysla de cuba con 



395 

todo lo acaes^ido por nosotros hasta aquella sazon y nos dixo, 
bien saben vras mds q diego velazqz gobernador de cuba me 
Eligio por capitan general, no porq Entre vras mds no avia 
muchos caballeros q Eran mere^edores dello, ya saben e tu- 
vieron creydo q veniamos a poblar, y ansi se publicava y 
pregono, y segund an visto Enbiava A rrescatar ya saben lo 
q pasamos sobre q me queria bolver a la ysla de cuba a dar 
quenta al diego velazquez del cargo q me dio, conforme A 
BUS ynstru§iones, pues vras mds me mandaron y requirie- 
ron que poblasemos Esta tierra En norabre de su magestad, 
como gra^ias a nro seiior la tenemos poblada y fue cosa muy 
Agertada, y demas desto, me hizistes vro capitan general y 
justigia mayor della, hasta q su mag otra cosa seasuido man- 
dar E como ya E dho Entre Algunos de vras mds ovo Al- 
gunas platicas de bolver A cuba, q no lo quiero Aqui mas 
declarar, pues a manera de dezir, Ayer paso y fue muy san- 
ta y buena nra qdada y Emos hecho a dios y a su mag gran 
servi§io, questo claro esta, y ya saben lo q prometimos En 
nras cartas A su mag despues de le haber dado^quenta y rre- 
lagion de todos nros hechos, q punto no quedo, E q aquesta 
tierra Es de la manera q Emos visto y cono§ido della ques 
quatro vezes mayor q castilla, y de grandes pueblos y muy 
rrica de oro y minas y tiene gerca otras provingias, y como 
Enbiamos A suplicar a su magestad que no la diese En go- 
verna§ion, ni de otra cualquier manera, A persona ninguna 
y porque creyamos y teniamos por gierto, quel obispo de 
burgos don Joan rrodriguez de fonseca, q Era En aqlla sazon 
presidente de yndias y tenia mucho mando, q la demanda- 
ria A su mag para el diego velazquez, o algun pariente o 
amigo del mesmo obispo, porq u esta tierra es tal o tan buena 
que convenia darse a vn ynfante o gran seiior y q teniamos 
determinado de no dalla A persona alguna, hasta q su mag 
oyese a nros procuradores, y nosotros viesemos su rreal fir- 
ma E vista, q con lo q fuere servido mandar, los pechos por 
tierra, y con las cartas ya saben q Enbiamos y servimos a su 
mag todo El oro, y plata y joyas, E todo quanto teniamos y 
aviamos avido y mas dixo, bien se les acordara senores, quan- 



tas vezes Emos llegado a punto de muerte En las guerras y 
batallas q Emos avido, pues traellas a la memoria q Acos- 
tunbrados estamos de trabajos, y aguas, y vientos, y algunas 
vezes hanbres, y sienpre traer las armas A cuestas y dormir 
por los suelos, ansi nevando como lloviendo, q si miramos 
En ello, los cueros tenemos ya curtidos DE los trabajos no 
quiero dezir de mas de §inquenta de nros conpaneros, que 
nos an muerto En las guerras ni de todas vras mds, como 
estays Entrapajados y mancos de heridas, q avn ahora Es- 
tan por sanar pues q les quiera traer A la memoria los tra- 
bajos que truximos por la mar y las batallas de tabasco, 
y los q se hallaron en lo de almeria y lo de ^ingapa^inga, y 
quantas vezes por las sierras y caminos nos procuravan de 
quitar las vidas, pues En las batallas de tascala en q punto 
nos pusieron, y quales nos trayan, pues la de cholula ya te- 
nian puestas las ollas para comer nros Cuerpos, pues A la 
subida de los puertos no se les habra olvidado los poderes q 
tenia montezuma para no dexar ninguno de nosotros, y vien 
bieron los Catninos todos llenos de arboles cortados, pues los 
peligros de la Entrada y estada En la gran §ibdad de mx~ 
quantas vezes teniamos la muerte al ojo, quien los podra 
conponderar, pues vean los q han venido de vras mds dos 
vezes primero q no yo, la vna con fran§isco hernandez de 
Cordova, y la otra con Juan de grijalba, los trabajos, han- 
bres, e sed y heridas y muertes de muchos soldados q En 
descubrir aquestas tierras pasastes, y todo lo q en aqllos dos 
viajes aviays gastado de vras haziendas, y dixo q no queria 
Contar otras Cosas muchas q tenia por dezir por menudo y 
no abria tienpo para Acaballo de platicar porq era tarde 
e benia la noche y mas dixo, digamos Agora, senores, co- 
mo viene panfilo de narvaez contra nosotros, con mucha 
rrabia y deseo de nos aver a las manos, y no abian desEn- 
barcado y nos llamauan de traydores y malos, y Enbio A 
dezir Al gran montezuma no palabras de sabio capitan, sino 
de alborotador y demas desto, tuvo Atrevimiento de prender 
avn oydor de su mag, q por solo este gran delito, Es dino de 
ser muy bien castigado / . ya Abran oydo como An pregonado 



897 

En 8U rreal guerra contra nosotros, A rropa franca, como si 
fueramos moros y luego despues de aver dho esto cortes Co- 
mengo A sublimar nras personas y esfuergos £n las guerras y 
batallas pasadas y q ententes peleavamos por salvar nras vi- 
das, y q agora Emos de pelear con todo vigor por vida y hon- 
rra pues nos vienen a prender y hechar de nras casas y rrobar 
nras haziendas y q demas desto, que no sabemos si trae pro- 
visiones de nro rrey y senor, salbo fabores del obispo de bur- 
gos nro contrario y q si por ventura caemos debajo de sus 
manos del narvaez, lo qual dios no permita, q todos nros 
serviyios q Emos hecho, a dios primeram^ y a su magestad, 
tornaran En deservigios y haran pro§esos contra nosotros, y 
diran q emos muerto, y rrobado y destruydo la tierra donde 
Ellos son los rrobadores y alborotadorea y deservidores de 
nro rrey y sefior, diran q le an servido y pues q vemos por 
los ojos todo lo que A dho, y como buenos cavalleros somos 
obligados A bolver por la honrra de su mag y por las nras 
y por nras Casas y haziendas, y con esta ynteuQion salio de 
mexico, teniendo confianga en dios y de nosotros, q todo lo 
ponia En las manos de dios, primeramente y despues En 
las nras, q veamos lo q nos pares§e. Entonces todos a vna le 
rrespondimos, y tanbien Juntamente con nosotros Juan ve- 
lazquez de leon y frangisco de lugo y otros capitanes, que 
tuviese por gierto q mediante Dios Abiamos de ben§er o mo- 
rir sobre ello, - y q mirase no le convengiesen con partidos, 
porq si Alguna cosa ha/Ja fea que le dariamos destocadas. 
Enton§es como vio nras voluntades, se holgo mucho, E dixo, 
que con aquella confian^a venia, y alii hizo muchas ofertas 
y prometimientos que seriamos todos muy rricos y valero- 
rosos y hecho Esto torno A dezir q nos pedia por md, q ca- 
llasemos, y q En las guerras y batallas an menester mas pru- 
den§ia y saber para bien ven§er los cotrarios, q con osadia, 
y q porq tenia conos§ido de nros grandes Esfuer^os, q por 
ganar honrra cada vno de nosotros, se queria Adelantar de 
los primeros a Encontrar con los Enemigos, q fuesemos pues- 
tos En ordenan§a y capitanias y para q la primera Cosa q hi- 
ziesemos fuese tomalles El artilleria, q Eran diez y ocho ti- 



398 

ros q tenian asestados delante sus aposentos del narvaez, 
mando q fuese por capitan vn pariente suyo de cortes, q se 
se dezia pi§arro, q ya E dho otras vezes, en aquella sazon no 
avia fama de peru ni de pi9arros, que no Era deBcubierto, E 
era el pizarro suelto man^ebo, y le seilalo sesenia soldados 
man§ebos y Entre Ellos me nonbraron a mi, y mando que 
despues de tomada El artilleria, Acudieseraos todos al apo- 
sento de narvaez, questava En vn muy alto Cu y para pren- 
der al narvaez sefialo por capitan A gon^alo de sandoval con 
otros sesenta conpafieros, y como Era alguazil mayor le dio 
vn mandamiento que dezia ansi. gongalo de sandoval Al- 
guazil mayor desta nueva espaiia, por su mag, yos mando q 
prendays El cuerpo A panfilo de narvaez, E si se os defendiese 
matalde, que ansi con viene Al servi§io de dios y del rrey nro 
seflor,por quanto Ahecho muchas cosasEn desservigio de dios 
y de su m. y le prendio A vn oydor dado en este rreal y la firma 
hernando cortes, y rrefrendado de su secretario pero hernan- 
dez, y despues de dado El mandamiento prometio que al pri- 
mer soldado q le Echase mano le daria tres mill pesos, y al 
segundo dos mill, y al tergero mill, y dixo q aquello que pro- 
metia q Era para guantes, q ya bien viamos la rriqueza q abia 
Entre nras manos, y luego nonbro a Joan velazquez de leon 
para que prendiese Al man§ebo diego velazquez, con quien 
avia tenido la brega, y le dio otros sesenta soldados, y ansi mis- 
mo nonbro a diego de ordas para que prendiese al salvatierra, 
y le dio otros sesenta soldados y el mismo cortes por sobresa- 
liente, con otros veynte soldados para acudir A donde mas 
nesgesidad oviese, y donde El tenia El pensamiento de Asis- 
tir Era para prender al narbaez y Al salvatrra, pues ya'dadas 
las copias A los capitanes, como dho tengo, dixo, bien se que 
los de narvaez, son por todos quatro vezes mas q nosotros, 
mas Ellos no son Acostunbrados a las armas y como estan 
la mayor parte dellos mal con su Capitan y muchos dolien- 
tes, y les tomaremos de sobresalto, tengo pensamiento q dios 
nos dara vitoria, que no porfiaran mucho En su defensa, porq 
mas bienes les haremos nosotros q no su narvaez, ansi q se- 
nores, pues nra vida y honrra esta, despues de dios, en vros 






899 

esfuer^os e vigurosos bra90s, no tengo mas que os pedir por 
md, ni traer a la memoria, si no q En esto esta el toque de 
nras honrras y famas para sienpre jamas, y mas vale morir 
por buenos que bivir afrentados, y porq En aquella sazon llo- 
via, E Era tarde, no dixo mas. Vna cosa me E pasado des- 
pues aca a pensar, q xamas nos dixo tengo tal con^ierto En 
el rreal hecho ni hulano ni gutano, es en nro fabor ni cosa 
ninguna destas, sino q peleasemos como varones, y Esto de 
no dezirnos q tenia amigos En el rreal de narvaez, fue de muy 
cuerdo capitan, q por aquel Efeto no dexasemos de batallar 
como muy Esforgados, y no tubiesemos Esperanya En ellos, 
sino despues de dios En nros grandes animos. dexemos des- 
to y digamos como cada vno de nros capitanes por mi non- 
brados Estavan con los soldados senalados como y de que 
manera aviamos de pelear, y poniendose Esfuer§o los vnos a 
los otros pues mi capitan pigarro, con quien aviamos de to- 
mar El artilleria q Era la cosa de mas peligro, y aviamos de 
ser los primeros q aviamos de rronper hasta los tiros, tan- 
bien dezia con mucho Esfuer§o, como aviamos de Entrar y 
calar nras picas hasta tener la Artilleria En nro poder, y des- 
que se la obiesemos tomado, que con ella misma a nros arti- 
Ueros que se dezian mesa y el §i§iliano, E vsagre, E arvega, 
q con las pelotas questuviesen por descargar, diesen guerra A 
los del aposento del salvatierra tanbien quiero dezir la gran 
nes^esidad q teniamos de armas, q por vn peto, o capagete, o 
caxco, o babera de hierro dieramos aquella noche quanto nos 
pidieran por ello, y todo quanto aviamos ganado, y luego se- 
cretamente nos nonbraron El apellido que abiamos de tener 
Estando batallando, q Era espiritu santo, espiritu santo, 
questo se suele hazer secreto En las guerras, porq se conoz- 
can E apelliden por el nonbre, que no lo sepan vnos contra- 
rios de otros y los de narvaez tenian su apellido, y boz san- 
ta maria santa maria. ya hecho todo esto, como yo Era gran 
amigo y servidor del capitan sandoval, me dixo aquella no- 
che, que me pedia por md que desque oviesemos tomado El 
artilleria, q si quedava con la vida, q sienpre me hallase con 
el y le siguiese, E yo se lo prometi y ansi lo hize, como ade- 



400 

lante veran digamos agora En que se Entendio vn rrato de 
la noche, sino En aderegar y pensar En lo q teniamos por 
delante, pues para genar no teniamos cosa ninguna y luego 
fueron nros corredores del canpo, y se puso Espias y velas, 
A mi E a otro soldado nos pusieron por belas y no tardo mu- 
cho quando viene vn corredor del canpo A me preguntar, q 
si E sentido Algo, E yo dixe que no, y luego vino vn qua- 
drillero y dixo quel galleguillo, que avia venido del rreal de 
narvaez, no pares9ia, y que Era Espia hechada del narvaez, 
E q mandava cortes q luego marchasemos camino de 9en- 
poal, E oymos tocar nro pifaflon y atanbor y los Capitanes 
Apergibiendo sus soldados, y comen§amos a marchar y el 
galleguillo hallaron debajo de vnas mantas durmiendo, q 
como llovio y el pobre no Era acostunbrado A estar al agua 
ny fries, metiose alii a dormir, pues yendo a nro paso tendi- 
do, y los capitanes apergibiendo sus soldados y comen^amos 
a marchar como Esta dho sin tocar pifano ni atanbor, y 
nros corredores del canpo descubriendo la trra llegamos al 
rrio donde Estavan las espias del narvaez q ya E dho q se 
dezian gon§alo carrasco, E hurtado y estavan tan descuyda- 
dos que tubimos tienpo de prender al carrasco, y el otro fue 
dando bozes al rreal de narvaez diziendo al arma al arma q 
viene cortes. E Acuerdome q quando pasavamos aquel rrio 
Como llovia venia vn poco hondo y las piedras rresvala- 
ban algo, E con las picas y armas nos hazia mucho estorbo 
y tanbien me acuerdo quando se prendio al carrasco, dezia 
A cortes A grandes bozes, mira sefior cortes, no vayais alia, 
que jure a tal questa narvaez esperandos En el canpo con 
todo su Exergito, y cortes le die En guarda A su secretario 
pero hernandez, y como vimos quel hurtado fue a dar man- 
dado, no nos detubimos cosa, sino quel hurtado yva dando 
bozes, y mandando dar Al arma Al arma, y el narvaez Ua- 
mando A sus capitanes y nosotros calando nras picas y qe- 
rrando con El artilleria, todo fue vno, que no tuvieron tien- 
po sus artilleros de poner fuego sino a quatro tiros, y las 
pelotas algunas dellas pasaron por alto, E vna DEUas mate 
a tres de nros Conpafieros pues En aquel ynstante llegaron 



401 

todos nros capitanes tocando al arma nros pifano y atanbor, 
E como avia muchos de los de narvaez A caballo, detuvie- 
ronse vn poco Con ellos, porq luego derrocaron A seys o sie- 
te de ellos, pues nosotros los q tomamos El artilleria, no osa- 
vamos desmanparalla, porquel narvaez desde su aposento 
nos tirava muchas saetas y escopetas e erio siete de los nros, 
y En aquel ynstante llego El capitan sandoval y sube de 
presto las gradas arriba, y por mucha rresistengia q le ponia 
El narvaez y le tiravan saetas y escopetas e con partesanas e 
lanyas todavia las subio El y sus soldados y luego desque vi- 
mos los soldados q ganamos El artilleria, q no avia quien 
nos la defendiese, se la dimos a nros artilleros por mi non- 
brados, y fuymos muchos de nosotros y el capitan pijarro A 
ayudar al sandoval q les hazian los de narvaez venir dos gra- 
das Abajo rretrayendose y con nra ll'egada tornt) a las subir 
y estuvimos buen rrato peleando con nras picas q Eran gran- 
des, y quando no me acato oymos bozes del narvaez que de- 
zia santa maria valeme que muerto me an e quebrado vn ojo, 
y desq Aquello oymos luego dimos bozes, vitoria, vitoria, 
per los del nonbre del Espiritu santo, q muerto es narvaez, 
vitoria, vitoria por cortes, q muerto es narvaez, y con to- 
do Esto no les pudimos Entrar en el Cu donde estavan, 
hasta q vn martin lopez. El de los vergantines, como Era 
Alto de cuerpo puso fuego A las pajas del Alto Cu, E vie- 
nen todos los de narvaez rrodando las gradas Abajo. En- 
tonges prendimos al narvaez, y el primero que le echo mano 
fue vn pero sanchez farfan, buen soldado e yo se lo di al san- 
doval, E A otros capitanes que con el estavan, y todavia dan- 
do bozes y apellido, biva El rrey, biva El rrey, y En su rreal 
nonbre cortes, cortes, vitoria, vitoria, q muerto es narvaez. 
dexemos este conbate vamos a cortes y a los demas capitanes, 
que todavia estavan batallando cada vno Con los capitanes 
de narvaez, que avn no se avian dado, porqstavan En muy 
altos Cues y con los tiros que les tiravan nros artilleros y con 
nras bozes E muerte de narvaez, y como cortes Era muy 
avisado mando, de presto, pregonar q todos los de narvaez 
se vengan luego A someter debajo de la vandera de su ma- 

Bernal DIw del CastJUo— 52, 



402 

gestad, y de cortes En su rreal noiibre, so pena de muerte, 
y avn con todo esto no se davan los de diego velazqiiez el 
mozo ni los de salvatrra, porquestavan En muy altos Cues 
y no los podian Entrar, hasta que gongalo de sandoval fue 
con la mitad de nosotros los q co el estavamos y con los ti- 
ros y con los pregones, les entraron y se prendieron ansi El 
salvatrra como los q con el estavan, y al diego velazquez el 
mozo, y luego El sandoval vino con todos nosotros los que 
fuymos En prender Al narvaez, A ponelle mas En cobro, y 
desq cortes y el joan velazquez, y el ordas, tuvieron presos 
al salvatierra y al diego velazquez el mozo E a gamarra, E 
a juan yuste E a jii** bono bizcayno E a otras personas prin- 
gipales, se vino cortes desconosgido aconpanado de^ros ca- 
pitanes A donde teniamos a narvaez, e co el calor q azia gran- 
de y como estava cargado con las armas E andava de vna 
parte a otra, Apellidando nros soldados y haziendo dar pre- 
gones venia muy sudando e Cansado, y tal q no le alcan^a- 
va vn huelgo A otro, E dixo a sandoval dos vezes, q no lo 
Agertava A dezir del trabajo q traya y dixo ques de narvaez 
ques de narvaez dixo sandoval, Aqui esta, aqui Esta, E a muy 
buen rrecavdo, y torno cortes a dezir muy sin huelgo, mi- 
ra hijo sandoval que nos quiteys del, vos y nros conpaneros 
no se OS suelte, mientras yo voy A Entender En otras cosas, 
E mira Esos capitanes q con el teneys presos, q En todo aya 
rrecavdo y luego se fue y manda dar otros pregones, q so pe- 
na de muerte, que todos los de narvaez luego en aquel pun- 
to se vengan A someter debajo de la vandera de su magestad, 
y En su rreal nonbre hernando Cortes, su capitan general y 
Justigia mayor E q ninguno traxese ningunas armas, sino 
q todos las diesen y Entregasen a nros alguaziles, y todo es- 
to Era de noche, que no amanes5ia y avn llovia de rrato En 
rrato, y Entonges salia la luna, que quando alii llegamos 
hazia muy escuro y llovia, y tanbien la esCuridad Ayudo 
q como hazia tan Escuro abia muchos Cucuyos, q ansi los 
llama van en Cuba, q rrelunbran de noche, los de narvaez 
creyeron q eran mechas descopetas dexemos desto y pasemos 
adelante, que como El narvaez Estava muy mal herido y que- 



" 408 

brado El oJo, demando ligen^ia A sandoval para q vn su 
§urujano, q traya En su armada, que se dezia maestre Juan, le 
curase el ojo A el, y otros capitanes questavan heridos, y se 
la dio, y estandoles curando llego alii gerca cortes, disimula- 
do q no le conos9iesen a le ber, dixeronle al oydo al narvaez 
questava alii cortes e como se lo dixeron dixo el narvaez, se- 
fior Capitan cortes tene En mucho Esta vitoria q de mi 
Abeys avido, y En tener presa mi persona, y cortes le rres- 
pondio, q dava muchas gragias A dios q se la dio y por los 
Esforsados cavalleros y conpafieros que tiene, que fueron 
parte para ello, E q vna de las menores cosas q En la nueba 
Espaiia A hecho, Es prendelle y desbaratalle, q si le a pares- 
§ido bien tener Atrevimiento de prender a vn oydor de su 
magestad, y desq ovo dho esto, se fue de alii, q no le ablo 
mas, y mando A sandoval que le pusiese buenas guardas y 
ql no se quitase del, con psonas de rrecavdo, ya le teniamos 
hechado dos pares de grillos y le llevamos A vn Aposento, 
y puestos soldados q le aviamos de guardar, E a mi me se- 
fialo sandoval por vno de ellos, y secretam*® me mando que 
no dexase hablar con el, a ninguno de los de narvaez, hasta 
q amanes§iese que cortes le pusiese mas En cobro. dexemos 
desto y digamos como narvaez A via Enbiado quarenta de a 
cavallo, para q nos estuviese aguardando En el paso, quan- 
do viniesemos A su rreal, como dho tengo en el Capitulo que 
dello abla y supimos que andavan todavia En el canpo, tu- 
vimos temor no nos viniesen acometer, para nos quitar sus 
Capitanes E al mismo narvaez q teniamos presos, y estava- 
mos muy Aper§ebidos y acordo cortes de les Enbiar A pedir 
por md q se viniesen al rreal, con grandes ofresgimientos q 
A todos prometio, E para los traer Enbio A xpoual de oli 
q Era nro maestre de canpo, E a diego de ordas, y fueron En 
vnos cavallos q tomaron de los de narvaez q todos los nros 
de Cavallo, no truxeron ningunos que atados qdaron En vn 
montezillo. Junto a ^enpoal, q no truximos cavallos sino pi- 
cas, y espadas y rrodelas, y pufiales, y fueron al canpo con 
vno, soldado de los de narvaez, q les mostro El rastro por 
donde avian ydo, y se toparon con ellos, y En fin tantas pa- 



404 

labras de ofertas y prometimientos les dixeron por parte de 
cortes, q los truxeron y §iertos Cavalleros dellos le tenian 
mala voluntad, y antes q llegasen A nro rreal q era de dia 
claro, y sin dezir cosa ninguna cortes, ni ninguno de noso 
tros A los atabaleros quel narvaez traya, comen^aron A to- 
car los Atabales E A taiier sus pifanos y tanborinos, y dezia, 
biva biva la gala, de los rromanos, q siendo tan pocos an ven- 
zido a narvaez y a sus soldades E vn negro q se dezia guide- 
la, q fue muy gragioso truhan q traya el naravez dava bozes 
y dezia, mira q los rromanos no an hecho tal hazafia, y por 
mas q les deziamos q callaseny no tocasen sus Atabales no 
qrian, hasta q cortes mando q prendiesen Al atabalero, q era 
medio loco y se dezia tapia y En este ynstante vino xpoual 
de oli y diego de ordas, y truxeron a los de cavallo, q dho 
tengo, y Entre ellos venia Andres de duero e agustin bermu- 
dez y muchos Amigos de nro capitan, y ansi Como venian 
y van A besar las manos A cortes, questava sentado En vna 
silla de caderas con vna rropa larga, de color como naranjada, 
con sus armas debajo aconpanado de nosotros, pues ver la 
gragia con q les hablaba y abrayava, y las palabras DE tan- 
tos Cunplimientos que les dezia Era Cosa de ver, E q alegre 
Estaba, y tenia mucha rrazon de verse En aquel punto tan 
sefior y pujante y ansi como le besaban las manos se fueron 
Cada vno A su posada. digamos agora de los muertos y heri- 
dos q ovo aquella noche, murio El alferez de narvaez, q se 
dezia hulano de fuentes, q Era vn hidalgo de sevilla, murio 
otro capitan de narvaez q se dezia rrojas, natural de Castilla 
la vieja, murieron otros dos del narvaez, murio vno de los 
tres soldados q se le avian pasado, q avian sido de los nros 
que llamavamos alonso gar§ia El carretero, y heridos de los 
de narvaez ovo muchos, y tanbien murieron de los nuestros 
otros quatro, E ovo mas heridos, y el cacique gordo tanbien 
salio herido, porq como supo q veniamos ^erca de 9enpoal, 
se Acoxio Al Aposento de narvaez, y alii le hirieron, y lue- 
go cortes le mando curar muy bien y le puso En su casa, y 
q no se le hiziese Enojo, pues §erbantes El loco y escaloni- 
Ua, q son los q se pasaron al narvaez, q avian sido de los nros 



405 

tanpoco libraron bien, quel Escalona salio bien herido, y el 
gerbantes bien Apaleado, E ya E dho quel Carretero muer- 
to. vamos a los del Aposento del salvatierra, El muy fiero, 
q dixeron sus soldados q En toda su vida vieron honbre para 
menos, ni tan cortado de muerte, quando nos oyo tocar Al ar- 
ma, y quando deziamos, vitoria, vitoria, q muerto Es nar- 
vaez diz que luego dixo questava muy malo del estomago, 
E q no fue para Cosa ninguna. Esto lo E dho por sus fieros 
y brabear y de los de su Capitania tanbien ovo heridos. di- 
gamos del Aposento del diego velazquez y otros Capitanes 
questavan con el que tanbien obo heridos./ y nro capitan 
Joan velazquez. de leon prendio al diego velazquez, Aquel 
con quien tubo las bregas Estando comiendo con el narvaez 
y le llebo A su Aposento y le mando Curar y hazer mucha 
honrra pues ya E dado quenta de todo lo acaes§ido En nra 
batalla, digamos agora lo que mas se hizo. 



CAPITULO CXXIII. como despues de des- 
baratado narbaez segund y de la manera 
que Edho, vinieron losyndios de chinanta q 
cortes abia Enbiado a llamar, y de otras 
cosas q pasaron 

ya E dho En el capitulo q dello habla, q cortes Enbio a de- 
zir A los pueblos de chinanta, donde truxeron las langas e 
picas, que viniesen dos mill yndios dellos con sus langas q 
son muy mas largas q no las nras, para nos ayudar E vinie- 
ron aquel mismo dia, ya Algo tarde despues de preso nar- 
vaez y venian por Capitanes los Caciques de los mismos pue- 
blos, E vno de nros soldados, q se dezia barrientos, q avia 
quedado En chinanta para aquel Efeto, y Entraron En 
§enpoal con gran ordenan^a, de dos en dos, y como tray an 
las lanyas muy grandes de buen grosor y tienen en ellas vna 
bra^*a de cuchilla de pedernales, que cortan tanto como na- 



406 

vajas segund ya otras vezes E dho, y traya cada yndio vna 
rrodela como pavesina, y con sua vanderas tendidas, y con 
muchos plumajes y atanbores y tronpetillaa y entre cada 
lanyero e lan^ero vn flechero, y dando gritos y silvos dezian 
biva el rrey, biva el rrey nro sefior y hernando cortes En su 
rreal nonbre y Entraron muy bravosos, q Era cosa de notar 
y serian mill y quinientos, q paresgia de la manera y con« 
^ierto q venian q Eran tres mill, y quando los de narvaez 
los vieron se admiraron E diz que dixeron vnos a otros, q si 
Aquella gente les tomara En medio o entraran Con nosotros, 
q tal q les parara, y cortes hablo a los yndios capitanes muy 
Amorosam^ Agrades5iendoles su venida y les dio cuentas 
DE Castilla, y les mando q luego se bolviesen a sus pueblos, 
y que por el Camino no hiziesen dafio A otros pueblos, y tor- 
no a enbiar con ellos El mismo barrientos. y quedarse A 
aqui e dire lo que mas cortes hizo. 



CAPITULO CXXIIII. Como Cortes Enbio 
al puerto al capitan fran°° de lugo y en su 
Conpania dos soldados q avian sido maes- 
tres de navios, para q luego truxesen alii 
a (jenpoal todos los maestres y pilotos de 
los navios y flota de narvaez y que les sa- 
casen las velas y timones E agujas, por- 
que no fuesen A dar mandado A la ysla de 
Cuba a diego velazquez de lo acaes^ido, y 
como puso almirante de la mar, y otras Co- 
sas que pasaron. 

pues Acabado de desbaratar al panfilo De narvaez, E presos 
£1 y sus capitanes, £ a todos los denias tomadas las armas. 



407 

mando cortes Al capitan frangisco de lugo, q fuese Al puer- 
to Adonde Estava la fiota de narvaez, q Eran diez y ocho 
navios, y q mandase venir alii A genpoal A todos los pilotos 
y maestres de los navios y que les sacasen velas, y timones, 
E agujas, porq no fuesen a dar rnandado A cuba A diego Ve- 
lazquez E que si no le quisiesen obedes§er, que les Echase 
presos, y Uevo Consigo, El fran5isco de lugo dos de nros sol- 
dados, q avian sido honbres de la mar, para q le ayudasen, 
y tanbien mando cortes que luego le Enbiasen a vn sancho 
de barahona, que le tenia preso El narvaez. Con otros dos sol- 
dados. Este barahona fue vezino de guatimala onbre rrico, 
y acuerdome q quando llego ante Cortes, que venia muy do- 
liente e flaco, y le mando hazer honra bolvamos a los maes- 
tres y pilotos, que luego vinieron A besar las manos Al ca- 
pitan cortes A los quales tomo juramento, q no saldrian de 
su mandado E que le obedes§erian En todo lo que les man- 
dase y luego les puso por almirante y capitan de la mar a vn 
pedro cavallero q avia sido maestro de vn navio de los de 
narvaez, persona de quien nro cortes se fio mucho, al qui di- 
zen que le dio primero buenos tejuelos de oro, y a este man- 
do q no dexase yr de aquel puerto, ningund navio, A parte 
ninguna, y mando a todos los demas maestres E pilotos y ma- 
rineros q todos le obede8§iesen y q si de cuba Enbiase diego 
Velazquez mas navios porq tuvo abiso q estaban dos navios 
pa venir, que tuviese manera y Aviso, q al capitan q en el 
viniese, le Echase preso y le sacase El timon E velas y agu- 
jas, hasta q otra cosa En ello cortes mandase lo qual ansi hi- 
zo El pedro Cavallero, Como Adelante dire, y dexemos ya 
los navios y el puerto seguro y digamos lo q se Concerto en 
nro rreal E los de narvaez, que luego se dio orden q fuese A 
conquistar y poblar, Juan velazquez de leon, A lo de panu- 
co y para ello Cortes le seflalo ^iento y veinte soldados, los 
giento avian de ser de los de narvaez y los veynte de los nros, 
Entremetidos, porque tenian mas Expiriengia En la guerra 
y tanbien avia de llebar dos navios, para q desde el rrio de 
panuco, fuesen A descubrir la costa iadelante y tanbien A 
diego de ordas dio otra capitania de otros 9iento y veinte sol- 



408 

dados, para yr A poblar A lo de gua§aqualco, y los §iento 
avian de ser de los de narvaez y los veynte de los nros, se- 
gun y de la man era q a Joan velazquez de leon, y avia de 
llevar otros dos navios, para desde El rrio de gua§aqualco 
Enbiar A la ysla de xamayca por ganados de yeguas y be- 
cerros, y puercos, y obejas y gallinas de castillay y cabras pa- 
ra multiplicar la tierra, porque la proui* DE gua§aqualco 
Era buena para Ello, pues para yr Aquellos Capitanes con 
sus soldados y llevar todas sus armas, Cortes les mando 
dar y soltar todos los prisioneros, capitanes de narvaez, E§e- 
to Al narvaez y El salvatierra, q dezia questava malo del Es- 
tomago, pues para dalles todas las armas Algunos de nros 
soldados les teniamos ya tornado cavallos y espadas y otras 
Cosas, manda Cortes que luego se las bolviesemos y sobre no 
darselas, ovo giertas platicas Enojosas y fueron q diximos los 
soldados q las teniamos muy claramente q no se las queria- 
mos dar pues q En el rreal de narvaez pregonaron guerra 
contra nosotros, E a rropa franca E con aquella yntengion 
nos venian A prender y tomar lo que teniamos, E que sien- 
do nosotros tan grandes servidores de su magestad, nos 11a- 
mavan traydores, E q no se las qriamos dar y cortes todavia 
porfiava A que se las diesemos e como era Capitan general, 
ovose de hazer lo que mando, que yo les di vn cavallo que 
tenia ya Escondido Ensillado y Enfrenado, y dos espadas y 
tres punales e vna daga, y otros muchos de nros soldados 
dieron tanbien otros cavallos E armas, y como Alonso de 
avila Era capitan y persona q osava dezir A cortes Cosas q 
convenian, E juntamente con el El padre de la md hablaron 
Aparte A cortes y le dixeron q paresgia que queria rremedar 
A alexandro ma§edonio, q despues q con sus soldados avia 
hecho alguna gran Azafia, q mas procurava de honrrar y ha- 
zer mds A los q vencjia, q no a sus Capitanes y soldados q 
Eran los q lo vengian y esto q lo dezian porq lo que vian En 
aquellos dias, q alii Estavamos, despues de preso narvaez, 
que todas las joyas de oro q le psentava los yndios a cortes 
y bastimentos, dava A los capitanes de narvaez, E q como si 
no nos Conos§iera, ansi nos olvidava y q no Era bien hecho 



409 

sine may gran 3aigratitud, aviendole puesto En el estado En 
questava. — A esto rrespondio cortes que todo quanto tenia, 
Ansi persona Como bienes, Era para nosotros, E q al presen- 
te no podia mas, sino con dadivas, y palabras, y ofres§imien- 
to, dar A los de narvaez, porq como son muchos e nosotros 
pocos, no se levanten contra el y contra nosotros, y le mata- 
sen. A esto rrespondio El alonso de abila y le dixo §iertas 
palabras Algo sobervias, de tal manera q Cortes le dixo, q 
quien no le quisiese seguir q las mugeres An parido o paren 
En castilla soldados, y el alonso de avila dixo, con palabras 
muy sobervias e sin acato, q ansi Era verdad, q soldados, y 
capitanes, E governadores, E q aqllo meresgiamos q dixese. 
E como En Aquella sazon Estava la cosa de arte q cortes no 
podia hazer otra cosa sino callar y con dadivas y ofertas le 
atraxo a si, y como conos§io del ser muy Atrevido, E tu- 
vo sieupre Cortes temor que por ventura vn dia, o otro no 
hiziese Alguna cosa En su dano disimulo, E dende Alii Ade- 
lante sienpre le Enbiava A nego§ios de ynportangia, Como 
fue A la ysla de santo domingo, y despues A espana quando 
Enbiamos la rrecamara y tesoro del gran montezuma, que 
rrobo joan florin gran Cosario fran§es lo qual dire En au 
tienpo y lugar y bolvambs agora Al narvaez E a vn negro q 
traya lleno de biruela, q harto negro fue para la nueva es- 
pana que fue cavsa q se pegase y hinchiese toda la tierra de- 
llas de lo qual ovo gran mortandad, q segund dezian los yn- 
dios jamas tal Enfermedad tuvieron, y como no lo conosgian, 
labavanse muchas vezes, y a esta causa se murieron gran 
cantidad dellos por manera q negra la ventura del narvaez, 
y mas prieta la muerte de tanta gente sin ser xpianos. dexe- 
mos Agora todo Esto, y digamos Como los vezinos de la vi- 
lla rrica q avian quedado poblados, q no fueron A mexico, 
demandaron A cortes las partes del oro q les cabia, E dixe- 
ron a cortes que puesto q alii les mando quedar En aquel 
puerto E villa q tanbien Serbian alii A dios y al rrey, Como 
los que fuymos a mex^° pues Entendian En guardar la trra 
y hazer la fortaleza, y algunos dellos se hallaron En la de 
almeria, q avn no tenian sanas las heridas, y q todos los mas 

Beroal Dlas del CaatiUo.— 68. 



410 

se hallaron En la prision de narvaez, y que les diesen sus 
partes. E viendo cortes qEra muy justo lo"q dezian, dixo q 
fuesen dos honbres prin§ipales vezinos de aquella villa can 
poder de todos y q lo tenia Apartado E se lo darian y pares- 
5eme que les dixo, que En tascala Estava guardado, questo 
no me Acuerdo bien E ansi luego despacharon de aquella 
villa dos vezinos por el oro e partes, El principal se dezia 
Joan de Alcantara, El viejo, y dexemos de platicar En ello, 
y despues diremos lo q subgedio Al alcantara e Al oro, y di- 
gamos como la adversa fortuna buelve de presto su rrueda, 
que a grandes bonanzas y plazeres, da tristeza, y es que En 
este ynstante vienen nuevas q mexico Esta Al§ado, y q pe- 
dro de alvarado Esta §ercado En su fortaleza y aposento y 
q le ponian fuego por dos partes En la misma fortaleza y que 
le an muerto siete soldados, y questavan otros muchos heri- 
dos, y Enbiava a demandar socorro Con mucha ynstan^ia y 
priesa, y esta nueva traxeron dos tascaltecas sin carta nin- 
guna y luego vino vna carta con otros tascaltecas q Enbio 
El pedro de alvarado, En q dezia lo mismo, y desq Aquella 
tan mala nueva oymos sabe dios quanto nos peso, y a gran- 
des Jornadas comen§amos A marchar para mexico, y quedo 
preso En la villa rrica El narvaez E el salvatierra, y por te- 
niente y capitan pares§eme q quedo rrodrigo rrangel q tu- 
viese cargo de guardar Al narvaez y de rrecoger muchos de 
los de narvaez q estavan dolientes, y tanbien En este yns- 
tante ya que queriamos partir vinieron quatro grandes prin- 
fipales, q Enbio El gran montezuma, ante cortes, A quexar- 
se del pedro de Alvarado, y lo q dixeron llorando muchas 
lagrimas de sus ojos q pedro de alvarado salio de su Aposen- 
to con todos los soldados q le dexo Cortes, y sin cavsa riin- 
guna, dio En sus principal es y Cagiques questavan baylando 
y haziendo fiesta A sus ydolos huychilobos y tezcatepuca 
con \i^ q pa ello les dio el pedro de alvarado. E q mato E 
hirio muchos dellos y que por se defender, le mataron seys 
de sus soldados, por manera q davan muchas qxas del pe- 
dro de alvarado y cortes les rrespondio A los mensageros Al- 
go desabrido, E quel yrya A mexico, y pornia rremedio En 



411 

todo y ansi fueron con aquella rrespuesta A su gran monte- 
zuma, y diz que lo sintio por muy mala, y ovo Enqjo della, 
y ansi mismo luego despacho cortes Cartas para pedro de 
alvarado, En que le Enbio A dezir q mirase q El monteyu- 
ma no se soltase E que y vamos A grandes Jornadas, y le hi- 
zo saber de la vitoria q aviamos avido Contra narvaez, lo 
qual ya sabia El gran montezuma y dexallo E Aqui, y dire 
lo que mas adelante paso. 



CAPITULO CXXV. Como fuymos A gran- 
des Jornadas ansi cortes como todos sus 
Capitanes, y todos los de narvaez, Eijeto 
panfilo de narvaez, y el salvatierra q qda- 
van presos. 




OMO llego la nueva por mi memorada, Como pedro 
de alvarado Estava §ercado, y mexico rrebelado, 
jesaron las capitanias q avian de yr A poblar A 
panuco E A gua§aqualco, q avian dado a Juan velazquez de 
leon, y a diego de ordas, q no fue nihguno dellos, q todos 
fueron con nosotros, y cortes hablo a los de narvaez q sintio 
q no yrian con nosotros de buena voluntad a hazer Aquel 
socorro, y les rrqgo q dexasen atras Enemistades pasadas por 
lo De narvaez, ofres§iendoseles De hazerlos rricos y dalles 
Cargos, y pues venian a buscar la vida y estavan En tierras 
donde podrian hazer servi§io A dios y a su magestad y En- 
rrique§er, y pues q agora venia lan§e, y tantas palabras les 
dixo, que todos a vna se le ofres§ieron q yrian con nosotros, 
y si supieran las fuer§as de mex~, gierto esta que no fuera 



412 

ninguno, y luego Caminamos a muy grandes jornadas hasta 
llegar a tascala, donde supimos q hasta q montezuraa y sus 
capitanes Avian sabido como abiamos desbaratado a narvaez, 
no dexaron de dar guerra y le avian ya muerto siete solda- 
dos, y le qmaron los Aposentos, y q desque supieron nra vi- 
toria, gesaron de dalle guerra mas dixeron questavan muy 
fatigados por falta de agua y bastimento, El qual bastimen- 
to nunca se lo abia mandado dar El montezuma, y esta nue- 
va truxeron yndios de tascala, En aquella misma ora q ovi- 
mos llegado. y luego cortes mando hazer Alarde de la gente 
que llevava y hallo sobre mill y trezientos soldados Ansi de 
los nros como de los de narvaez y sobre noventa y seys ca- 
vallos y ochenta vallesteros, y otros tantos Escopeteros con 
los quales le pares§io A cortes q llevava gente para poder 
entrar muy a nro salvo En mexico, y demas desto En tas- 
cala nos dieron los Caciques dos mill yndios de guerra y lue- 
go fuymos A grandes Jornadas hasta tezcuco, ques vna gran 
§ibdad, y no se nos hizo honrra ninguna En ella ni paresgio 
ningun sefior, sino todo muy rremotado y de mal arte, y lle- 
gamos a mexico dia de sefior san Joan de Junio de mill E 
quinientos, y veynte afios, y no paresgian por las calles Ca- 
yiques ni Capitanes ni yndios Conosgidos, sino todas las Casas 
despobladas, y como Uegamos A los Aposentos en q soliamos 
posar El gran montezuma salio Al patio para hablar y Abra- 
gar A cortes. y dalle El bien venido, y de la vitoria con nar- 
vaez, y cortes como benia bitorioso, no le quiso oyr, y el mon- 
tezuma se Entro En su Aposento muy triste y pensativo. 
pues ya Aposentados cada vno de nosotros donde soliamos 
Estar antes q saliesemos de mexico para yr a lo de narvaez 
y los de narvaez En otros Aposentos, E ya Abiamos visto E 
hablado con el pedro de alvarado, y los soldados que con el 
quer'aron y ellos nos davan quenta de las guerras q los me- 
xicanos les davan y trabajo en q les tenian puesto y nosotros 
les davamos rrelagion de la vitoria contra narvaez, y dexare 
Esto y dire como Cortes procuro saber q fue la cavsa de se 
levantar mexico, porq bien Entendido teniamos q montezu- 
ma le peso dello q si le plugiera o fuera por su consejo, di- 



418 

xeron muchos soldados de los q se qdaron con pedro de al- 
varado En aquellos tranjes q si el motezuma fuera en ello, 
que a todos les mataran y quel montezuma los aplacava que 
9esasen la guerra y lo que contava el pedro de alvarado a 
Cortes sobre el Caso era que por libertar los mexicanos Al 
montezuma, E porq su huichilobos se lo mando porque pusi- 
mos En su casa la ymagen de nra sefiora la virgen santa ma- 
ria y la cruz, y mas dixo, que avian llegado muchos yndios 
A quitar la santa ymagen del altar donde la pusimos, y que 
no pudieron E que los yndios lo tuvieron a gran milagro y 
q se lo dixeron al montezuma E que les mando q la dexasen 
En el mismo lugar y altar y q no curasen de hazer otra co- 
sa, y ansi la dexaron y mas dixo el p*^ de alvarado q por lo 
quel narvaez les avia Enbiado a dezir Al montezuma q le 
venia A soltar de las prisiones e A prendernos, y no salio 
verdad, E como cortes avia dho al montezuma q en tenien- 
do navios nos aviamos de yr A Enbarcar, y salir de toda 
la trra, E q no nos yvamos, E que todo Eran palabras, E que 
agora abia bisto venir muchos mas tevles, antes que todos 
los de narvaez e los nros tornasemos A Entrar en mexico 
que seria bien matar Al pedro de Alvarado y a sus soldados 
y soltar Al gran montezuma, y despues no qdar a vida a 
ninguno de los nros E de los de narvaez, quanto mas que 
tuvieron por §ierto q nos veuQeria El narvaez y sus soldados. 
estas platicas y descargo dio pedro de alvarado a cortes y le 
torno a dezir Cortes q a que cavsa les fue a dar guerra Es- 
tando baylando y haziendo sus fiestas y rrespondio, q sabia 
muy 5iertamente q En acabando las fiestas y bayles y sacri- 
fi§ios, q hazian A su huychilobos y a tezcatepuca, q luego le 
avian de venir A dar guerra segun El congierto tenian En- 
tre Ellos hecho, y todo lo demas, que lo supo de vn papa, y 
de dos pringipales, y de otros mexicanos, E cortes le dixo, 
pues anme dicho q le demandaron Ii9en9ia para hazer El 
areyto y bayles, dixo q ansi Era verdad, E que fue por to- 
raalles descuydados, E que porque temiesen y no viniesen a 
dalle guerra q por esto se adelanto a dar En ellos, y desque 
aquello cortes le oyo le dixo, muy enojado q Era muy mal 



414 

hecho e gran desatino ^ E que plugiera a dios quel montezu- 
ma se oviera soltado E que tal cosa no la oyera A sua ydo- 
los. E ansi le dexo q no le hablo mas En ello. tanbien * cji- 
xo El mismo p® de alvarado, que quando andava con alios 
En aquella guerra que mado poner a vn tiro q estava jeba- 
do fuego, el qual tenya vna pelota, E muchos perdigones, E 
q como venian muchos Esqaadrones de yndios a le quemar 
los Aposentos, que salio A pelear con ellos E que mando po- 
ner fuego Al tiro E que no salio, y desque hizo vna Arreme- 
tida Contra los Esquadrones que le davan guerra y cargavan 
muchos yndios sobrel, E que venia rretrayendose A la fuer- 
5a, E Aposento, E q Entonges, sin poner fuego al tiro, salio 
la pelota y los perdigones, y mato muchos yndios, y q si 
Aquello no acaes§iera q los Enemigos les mataran a todos^ 
como En aquella vez les llebaron dos de sus soldados bivoB. 
Otra cosa dixo el p® de alvarado, y esta sola cosa la dixeron 
otros soldados, q las demas platicas solo EI pedro de alvara- 
do lo cotava, y es que no tenian agua para bever, y cabaron 
En el patio, E hizieron vn po^o y sacaron agua dulje, sien- 
do todo salado, tanbien todo fue muchos bienes q nro Sefior 
dios nos hazia. E a esto del agua digo yo q En mx~ Estava 
vna fuente q muchas vezes e todas las mas manava Agua. ' 
Estas cosas, y otras, se dezir que lo oy a personas de fee y 
creer, que se hallaro co el p® de alvarado quado aqllo pa»o, 
y dexallo E aqui y dire la gran guerra q luego nos dieron, y 
es desta manera. 



1 Testado en el original: **e poca verdad.*' 

2 Testado en el original: '^yo quiero dezir q dezia El pedro de albarado, que 
quando peleavan los yndios mexicanos con el, q dixeron muchos dellos q yna 
gran tecle^iguata qiies gran Sefiora q era otra como la questava En su gran Cu, 
les heehava tierra En los ojos y les ^egava y que vn guey tevle q andava En 
vn cavallo bianco les hazian mucho mal y q si por ellos no fueran q les mata- 
ran A todos E q aqllo diz que se lo dixeron Al gran monte^uma sus prin9lpale8 
y si Aquello fue ansi, grandisimos milagros son E de oontino Emos de dar gn- 
qioB a dios E a la virgen santa maria nra Senora su bendita madre q En todo 
nos socorre, Eal bien aventurado sefior Santiago." 

3 Taohado en el original: ''algo dul^e que lo demas q dizen Algunas perso- 
nas q el p** de alvarado por coMi9ia de aver mucho oro y Joyas de gran valor 



415 



CAPITULO CXXVI. Como iios dieron gue- 
rra en mx*^ y los Conbates q nos davan y 
otras cosas que pasaraos. 

como cortes vio q en tezCuco no nos abian hecho ningun 
rresgibimi** ni avn dado de comer, si no mal y por mal cabo 
y que no hallamos prin§ipales con quien hablar y lo vio to- 
do rremotado y de mal arte, y venido A mx*^ lo mismo, y 
vio q no hazian tianguez, sino todo levantado E oyo al pe- 
dro de alvarado de la manera y descon§ierto c6 q les fue a dar 
guerra, y pares^e ser ayia dho cortes En el camino a los ca- 
pitanes de narvaez, Alabandose de si mismo El gran Acato 
y mando q tenia, E que por los caminos le saldrian a rres- 
5ebir, y hazer fiestas, e le darian oro, y q En mexico man- 
dava tan Asolutamente Asi Al gran montezuma Como a to- 
dos sus capitanes, E q le darian presentes de oro, Como solian, 
y. viendo q todo estava muy Al Contrario de sus pensamien- 
tos, q avn de comer no nos davan, estava muy Ayrado, y so- 
bei'vio con la mucha gente despanoles q traya, y muy triste 
y mohino, y En este ynstante Enbio El gran montezuma 
dosde sus prin§ipales a rrogar a nro Cortes q le fuese a ver, 
q le queria hablar, y la rrespuesta q les dio dixo, vaya para 
perro, q avn tianguez no quiere hazer, ni de comer no nos 



con que baylaban los yndios, les fue a dar guerra, yo no lo creo^ ni nunca tal 
oy, ni es de creer q tal hiziese puesto que lo dize £1 obispo fray bartolome de 
las casas, Aquello y otras cosas q nunca pasaron, sino que verdaderamente Dio 
En ellos por metelles temor, E que Con aquellos males q les hizo tuviesen har- 
to q curar y Uorar En ellos, porq no le viniesen a dar guerra y como dizen 
que quien Acomete ven9e, y fue muy peor segim paresyio y tanbien supimos 
de mucha verdad q tal guerra, nunca El montezuma mando dar E que quan- 
do conbatian al pedro de alvarado, quel montezuma les mandava A los suyos 
q no lo hiziesen, E que le rrespondian los suyos que ya no era de ^ufrir tenelle 
preso, y estando baylando ylles a matar como fueron, y q le abian de sacar de 
alii y matar a todos los tevles que le defendian. ' ' 



416 

manda dar, y entonges como aquello le oyeron A cortes nros 
Capitanes, q fue Juan velazquez de leon y xpoual de oli E 
alonso de avila y fran® de lugo, dixeron sefior tenple su yra 
y mire quanto bieu y honrra nos A hecho este rrey destas 
trras ques tan bueno q si por el no fuese ya fueramos muer- 
tos, y nos abrian comido, E mire q hasta las hijas le a dado, 
y como esto oyo cortes se yndino mas de las palabras q le di- 
xeron, como pares§ian de rreprehension, E dixo que cunpli- 
mi^ e yo de tener Con vn perro, que se hazia con narvaez 
secretamente, E a ora veys q avn de comer no nos dan, y di- 
xeron nros capitanes, esto nos pares§e que deve hazer, y es 
bue cosejo y como cortes tenia Alii En mexico tantos espa- 
fioles, ansi de los nros Como de los de narvaez, no se dava 
nada por cosa ninguna, E hablava tan ayrado y descomedido 
por manera q torno a hablar a los pringipales, q dixesen A 
su sefior montezuma q luego mande hazer tianguez y mer- 
c^dos, si no q hara E que acontes§era, y los pringipales bien 
Entendieron las palabras injuriosas que cortes dixo de su se- 
fior y avn tanbien la rreprehension que nros capitanes die- 
ron A cortes sobre Ello, porq bien los conos§ian q avian si- 
do los que solian tener En guarda A su sefior, y sabian q 
Eran grandes servidores de su monte§uraa, y segund y de la 
manera q lo Entendieron, se lo dixeron Al montezuma, y de 
Enojo, o porque ya estava con9ertado q nos diesen guerra. 
No tardo vn quarto de ora que vino vn soldado a gran prie- 
sa muy mal herido, q venia de vn pueblo que esta junto a 
mexico q se dize tacuba, E traya vnas yndias q Eran de cor- 
tes, e la vna hija del motezuma, q pares§e ser las dexo a guar- 
dar alii al sefior de tacuba, q Eran sus parientes del mismo 
sefior, quado fuemos a lo de narvaez, y dixo aquel soldado 
questava toda la Qibdad y camino por donde venia lleno de 
gente de guerra, con todo genero de armas, y que le quitaron 
las yndias q traya y le dieron dos heridas E que si no se las 
soltara, que le tenian ya Asido para le meter En vna canoa 
y lleballe a sacrificar, y avian deshecho vna puente, y desq 
Aqllo oyo cortes E algunos de nosotros, §iertamente nos 
peso mucho porq bien Entendido teniamos, los q soliamos 



417 

batallar con yndios, la mucha multitud q dellos se suelen 
juntar E q por bien q peleasemos y avnq mas soldados tru- 
xesemos agora, q aviamos de pasar gran rriesgo de nras vi- 
das, y hanbres y trabajos, Espe§ialmente estando En tan 
fuerte 9ibdad, pasemos adelante y digamos, q luego cortes 
mando a vn capitan q se dezia diego de ordas, q fuese con 
quatro(;ientos soldados E entre EUos los mas ballesteros y 
escopeteros, y algunos de cavallo, E q mirase q Era Aquello q 
dezia El soldado q abia benydo herido y traxo las nuevas E 
q si viese q sin gerra e rruydo se pudiese Apagiguar lo pagi- 
ficase y como fue El diego de ordaz de la manera q le fue 
mandado con sus quatrogientos soldados, avn no ovo bien 
llegado A media calle por donde yva, quando le salen tan- 
tos Esquadrones mexicanos de guerra, y otros muchos ques- 
tavan En las agoteas, y le dieron tan grandes conbates q le 
mataron A las primeras arremetidas ocho soldados, y a to- 
dos los mas hirieron y al mismo diego de ordas le dieron 
tres heridas, por manera q no pudo pasar vn paso adelante, 
sino bolverse poco a poco Al aposento y al rretraer le mata- 
ron A otro buen soldado q se dezia lyscano, q con vn mon- 
tante avia hecho cosas de muy Esforgado varon, y En aquel 
ynstante si muchos Esquadrones salieron al diego de ordas, 
muchos mas vinieron a nros Aposentos, y tiran tanta vara 
y piedras con ondas y flecha, q nos hirieron de aquella vez 
sobre quarenta y seys de los nros y doze murieron de las he- 
ridas, y estavan tantos guerreros sobre nosotros ql diego 
de ordas q se venia rretrayendo, no podia llegar A los Apo- 
sentos por la mucha guerra q le davan, vnos por detras y 
otros por delante y otros desde las Agoteas, pues quiga Apro- 
vechava mucho nros tiros, ni escopetas, ni vallestas, ni Ian- 
gas ni estocadas q les davamos, ni nro buen pelear, q avnq 
les matavamos, y heriamos muchos dellos, por las puntas 
de las espadas y langas se nos metian con todo esto, gerravan 
sus Esquadrones y no perdian punto de su buen pelear, ni 
les podiamos Apartar de nosotros, y En fin con los tiros, y 
escopetas, y vallestas y el mal q les haziamos destocadas tu- 
vo tpo de entrar el ordas En el aposento, q hasta Entonges, 

Bemal Diaz del CastUlo.— 54. 



418 

y avnq queria, no podia pasar y con sus soldados bien heri- 
dos y Catorze menos, y todavia no 9esavan muchos esqua- 
drones de nos dar guerra, y dezirnos q Eramos como muge- 
res, y nos llamavan de vellacos, E otros vituperios, E avn 
no a sido nada todo El dano q nos an hecho hasta agora^ A 
lo q despues hizieron y es q tuvieron tanto atrevimiento, q 
vnos dandonos guerra por vnas partes y otros por otra, En- 
traron a ponernos fuego en nros aposentos q no nos podia- 
mos valer con el humo y fuego hasta q se puso rremedio con 
derrocar sobrel mucha tierra E atajar otras salas por donde 
venia El fuego, q verdaderamente alii dentro creyeron de 
nos qmar bivos y duraron estos conbates todo el dia, y avn la 
noche, estavan sobre nosotros tantos Esquadrones dellos, y 
tiravan varas y piedras, y flechas a bulto e piedra perdida 
que de lo del dia y lo de Enton§es estavan todos aquellos pa- 
tios y suelos hechos parvas dellos, pues nosotros, aquella 
noche En curar heridos y En poner rremedio En los porti- 
llos q avian hecho, y En aper§ebirnos para otro dia, En es- 
to se paso, pues desq amanesyio, Acordo nro Capitan, q con 
todos los nros y los de narvaez, saliesemos a pelear con ellos, 
y que llebasemos tiros, y escopetas y vallestas, y procurase- 
mos de los venger Al de menos que sintiesen mas nras fuer- 
gas y esfuer§o mejor quel dia pasado, y digo que teniamos 
hecho aquel con§ierto, q los mexicanos tenian congertado lo 
mismo, y peleavamos muy bien, mas Ellos estavan tan fuer- 
tes, y tenian tantos Esquadrones que se rremudavan de rrato 
En rrato, que avnquestubieran alii diez mill Etores troya- 
nos y otros tantos rroldanes, no les pudieran Entrar porq sa- 
bello Agora yo aqui dezir como paso, y bimos El teson en el pe- 
lear, digo q no lo se Escrevir porq ni aprovechavan tiros, ni 
Escopetas, ni vallestas, ni Apechugar Con Ellos, ni matalles 
treyntaniquarenta de cada vez q arremetiamos q tan Enteros, 
y Con mas vigor, peleavan, q Al pringipio, y si Algunas vezes 
les yvamos ganando Alguna poca de tierra o parte de Calle, 
hazian q se rretrayan Era para q les siguiesemos por Apartar- 
nos de nra fuerga y Aposento, para dar mas a su salvo En nos- 
otros, creyendo que no bolveriamos con las vida^ a los aposen- 



419 

tos, porq Al rretraernos hazian mucho mal pues para pasar 
a quemalles las casas, ya E dicho en el Capitulo que dello 
abla, q de casa A casa, tenian vna puente de madera, levadiza 
al^avanla, y no podiamos pasar sino por agua muy hondo, 
pues desde las a§oteas, los cantos y piedras no lo podiamos 
Qufrir, por manera q nos maltratavan y herian miichos de 
los nros, E no se yo para que lo escrivo ansi tan tibiamente, 
porq vnos tres o quatro soldados q se avian hallado en yta- 
lia, q alii estavan con nosotros, Juraron muchas vezes a dios, 
q guerras tan bravosas, jamas avian visto, En algunas q se 
avian hallado Entre xpianos y contra la artilleria del rrey 
de fran§ia, ni del gran turco, ni gente como aquellos yndios, 
con tanto Animogerrar los Esquadrones vieron, y porq de- 
zian otras muchas cosas, y cavsas q davan A ello, como ade- 
lante beran, y quedarse Aqui, y dire como con harto trabajo 
nos rretruximos a nros aposentos y todavia muchos esqua- 
drones de guerreros sobre nosotros, con grandes gritos E sil- 
vos, y tronpetillas y atanbores, llamandonos de vellacos, y 
para poco, q no osavamos atendelles todo El dia En batalla, 
sino bolvernos rretrayendo. Aquel dia mataron otros diez o 
doze soldados, y todos bolvimos bien heridos, y lo que paso 
de la noche fue En congertar para de ay a dos dias saliese- 
mos todos los soldados quantos sanos Abia En todo El rreal 
y con quatro ingenios A manera de torres, que se hizieron 
de madera bien rrezios, En que pudiesen yr debajo de cual- 
quiera dellos veinte y ginco honbres, y llebavan sus benta- 
nillas y aguJeros En ellos, para yr los tiros, y tanbien yvan 
Escopeteros y vallesteros, y junto con ellos aviamos de yr 
otros soldados escopeteros y vallesteros, y los tiros y todos 
los demas y los de a cavallo hazer Algunas Arremetidas y 
hecho este con§ierto, Como estuvimos Aquel dia q entendia- 
mos en la obra, y En fortalezer muchos portillos q nos te- 
nian hechos no salimos A pelear aql dia no se como lo diga 
y los grandes Esquadrones de guerreros q nos vinieron A los 
aposentos A dar guerra no solamente por diez o doze partes, 
sino por mas de veynte, porq En todos estavamos repartidos 
y En otras muchas partes, y Entre tanto que los adobamos 



e fortaleziamos como dho tengo, otros muchos Esquadrones 
procuravan Entrarnos En los Aposentos a escala vista, q iii 
por tiros ni vallestas, ni escopetas, ni por muchas arremeti- 
das y estocadas les podian rretraer, pues lo q dezian q En 
aquel dia no avian de qdar ninguno de nosotros y q avian 
de sacrificar a sus dioses nros cora§ones y sangre y con las 
piernas y bra§os, q bien tendrian para hazer Artazgas, E fies- 
tas y q los cuerpos Echarian a los tigres y leones y bivoras, 
y culebras, q tienen Engerrados, q se harten dellos, E q aql 
Efeto, A dos dias q mandaron q no les diesen de comer y 
quel oro q teniamos, que abriamos mal gozo del, y de todas 
las mantas y a los de tascala q con nosotros Estaban les de- 
zian que los meterian En javlas A Engordar E q poco A po- 
co harian sus sacrifigios con sus cuerpos y muy afetuosamente 
de/.ian q les diesemos su gran sefior montezuma y dezian 
otras cosas, y de noche ansimismo sienpre muchos silvos 
y bozes, y rrociadas de vara, y piedra, y flecha, y desq 
Amanes§io despues de nos Encomendar A dios, salimos de 
nros Aposentos Con nras torres, que me paresye a mi q En 
otras partes donde me E hallado En guerras En cosas q an 
sido menester, las llaman burt)s y mantas, y con los tiros y 
escopetas, y vallestas delante y los de cavallo haziendo al- 
gunas arremetidas e como E dho avnq les matavamos mu- 
chos dellos, no Aprovechava cosa para les hazer bolver las 
espaldas, sino q si muy bravamente avian peleado los dos 
dias pasados, muy mas fuertes E con mayores fuer^^as y es- 
quadrones estavan Este dia, y todavia determinamos q avnq 
a todos costase la vida, de yr con nras torres E ingenios has- 
ta El gran cu del huychilobos, no digo por estenso los gran- 
des con bates que En vna casa fuerte nos dieron, ni dire co- 
mo los cavallos los herian, ni nos Aprovechavamos dellos, 
porq avnq arremetian a los Esquadrones para rronpellos, ti- 
ravanles tanta flecha y vara, y piedra, q no se podian valer 
por bien armados q Estavan, y si los yvan alcanyando, lue- 
go se dexaban caer los mexicanos a su salvo. En las Agequias 
y lagunas, donde tenian hechos otros manparos pa los de ca- 
ballo, E estavan otros muchos yndios Con lan§as muy lar- 



421 

gas para Acabar de matarlos, an si q no Aprovechava cosa 
ninguna pues apartarnos A qmar ni deshazer ninguna casa, 
Era por demas, porq Como E dho, Estan todas en el agua, y 
de casa A casa vna puente levadiza, pasalla A nado Era co- 
sa muy peligrosa, porq desde las a^oteas tenian tanta piedra 
E cantos y manparos, q Era cosa perdida ponernos En ello, 
y demas desto En algunas Casas que les poniamos fuego, tar- 
dava vna casa En se qmar vn dia Entero y no se podia pe- 
gar fuego de vna casa a otra, lo vno estar Apartadas vna de 
otra, e el agua en medio, y lo otro ser de agoteas ansi q Eran 
por demas nros trabajos en abenturar nras personas En aque- 
Uo, por manera que fuymos hasta El gran Cu de sus ydolos 
y luego de rrepente suben En el mas de quatro mill mexica- 
nos, sin otras capitanias q en ellos estavan con grandes Ian- 
fas, E piedra, E vara, y se ponen En defensa y nos rresistie- 
ron la subida vn buen rrato, q no bastavan las torres ni los 
tiros ni vallestas, ni escopetas, ni los de cavallo, porq avnq 
qrian arremeter los cavallos avia vnas losas, muy grandes, 
Enpedrado todo El patio q se y van a los cavallos pies y ma- 
nos, y Eran tan lisas q cayan E como desde las gradas del 
alto Cu, nos defendian El paso, E a vn lado, E A otro tenia- 
mos tantos Contrarios y avnq nros tii:os llebavan diez o quin- 
ze dellos, E a estocadas E arremetidas matavamos otros mu- 
chos, cargava tanta gente q no les podiamos subir Al alto 
Cu, y con gran congierto tornamos a porfiar, sin llevar las 
torres porq ya estavan desbaratadas, y les subimos arriba. 
Aqui se mostro cortes muy varon, como sienpre lo fue o que 
pelear y fuerte batalla q aqui tuvimos Era cosa de notar ver- 
nos a todos corriendo sangre y llenos de heridas y otros muer- 
tos y quiso nro senor q llegamos A donde soliamos tener la 
ymagen de nra senora, y no la hallamos, q pares^jio segun su- 
pimos quel gran montezuma tenia devotion En ella, y le 
mando guardar y pusimos fuego A sus ydolos, y se qmo vn 
buen pedago de la sala co los ydolos huychilobos e tezCate- 
puca. Entonges nos ayudaron muy bien los tascaltecas, pues 
ya hecho Esto, estando questavamos vnos peleando E otros 
poniendo El fuego, como dho tengo, ver los papas qstavan 



422 

En este gran Cu, y sobre tres o quatro mill yndios, todoe 
pringipales, ya q nos bajavamos, qual nos hazian venir rro- 
dando seys gradas y avn diez Abajo, E ay tan to q dezir 
de otros Esquadrones qstavan En los petriles y concabi- 
dades del gran Cu, tirandonos tanta vara y flecha, q an- 
si a vnos Esquadrones como a los otros, no podiamos ha- 
zer cara, Acordamos Con mucho trabajo y rriesgo de nras 
personas de nos bolver a nros aposentos, los castillos dee- 
hechos y todos heridos y diez y seys muertos, y los yndios 
sienpre apretandonos, y otros Esquadrones por las espaldas 
q quien no nos vio avnq Aqui mas claro lo diga, yo no lo se 
senificar pues avn no digo lo q hizieron los Esquadrones me- 
xicanos q estavan dando guerra En los aposentos, En tanto 
q andavamos fuera, y la gran porfia y teson q ponian de les 
Entrar. En esta batalla prendimos dos papas prin9ipales, q 
cortes nos mando q los llevasen a buen rrecavdo. muchas 
vezes E visto pintada Entre los mexicanos y tascaltecas esta 
batalla y subida q hizimos En este gran Cu, y tienenlo por 
cosa muy Eroyea q avnq nos pintan a todos nosotros muy 
heridos corriendo sangre e muchos muertos En rretratos q 
tienen dello hechos, En mucho lo tienen Esto de poner fue- 
go al Cu y estar tanto guerrero guardandolo E en los petri- 
les, y concabidades y otros muchos yndios abajo en el suelo 
y patios llenos, y En los lados, y otros muchos, y deshechas 
nras torres como fue posible subille dexemos de hablar de ello 
E digamos como con gran trabajo tornamos a los aposentos, 
y si mucha gente nos fueron siguiendo y davan guerra, otros 
muchos estavan En los aposentos q ya \ea tenian derrocadas 
vnas paredes, para Entralles, y con nra llegada ^esaron, mas 
no de manera q En todo lo q qdo del dia, dexavan de tirar 
vara y piedra y flecha, y en la noche, grita, y piedra y vara 
dexemos de su gran teson y porfia, q sienpre A la contina 
tenian DE Estar sobre nros aposentos, como E dho, E diga- 
mos q Aqlla noche se nos fue En curar heridos, y enterrar 
los muertos y En adere^ar para salir otro dia A pelear E En 
poner fuer§as E manparos a las paredes q avian derrocado, 
E a otros portillos q avian hecho y tomar Consejo, Como y 



423 

de q manera podriamos pelear sin q rres^ibiesemos tantos 
danos ni muertes, y Ea todo lo que platicamos, no hallava- 
mos rremedio ninguno, pues tanbien quiero dezir las maldi- 
giones q los de narvaez hechavan a cortes, y las palabras q 
dezian, q rrenegavan del y de la tierra y avn de diego velaz- 
quez, q Aca les Enbio, q bien pa§ificos Estavan En su casas 
En la ysla de Cuba, y estava enbelesados E sin sentido. bol- 
vamos a nra platica q fue Acordado de demandalles pazes, 
para salir de mexico, y desq Amanesyio bienen muchos mas 
Esquadrones de guerreros y muy de hecho nos gercan por 
todas partes los aposentos, y si mucha piedra y flecha tira- 
van de antes, muchas mas Espesas y con mayores Alaridos, 
E silvos, vinieron Este dia, E otros Esquadrones por otras 
partes procuravan de nos Entrar, q no aprovechavan tiros, 
ni Escopetas y avnq les hazian harto mal. E viendo todo es- 
to acordo cortes q El gran montezuma les hablase desde vna 
A^otea, y les dixese q yesasen las guerras, E que nos que- 
ryamos yr de su 9ibdad, y quando al gran montezuma se lo 
fueron a dezir de parte de Cortes, dizen que dixo con gran 
dolor, q quiere ya de mi malinche, q yo no deseo bivir ni 
oylle pues En tal estado por su cavsa mi ventura me a tray- 
do, y no quiso venir, y avn dizen q dixo, q ya no le queria 
ver ni oyr a el ni A sus falsas palabras ni promesas E men- 
tiras, E fue El padre de la md y xpoual de oli, y le hablaron 
con mucho acato y palabras muy Amorosas, E dixo El mon- 
tezuma yo tengo creydo q no Aprovechare Cosa ninguna pa- 
ra q §ese la guerra, porq ya tienen alyado otro sefior E an 
propuesto de no os dexar salir de aqui con la vida, E ansi 
creo q todos vosotros abeys de morir. y bolvamos a los gran- 
des conbates q nos davan^ q montezuma se puso a vn petril 
de vna A§otea, Con muchos de nros soldados q le guardavan, 
y les comenQO A hablar c6 palabras muy Amorosas q dexa- 
sen la guerra E q nos yriaraos de mx*^ y muchos prin§ipa- 
les y capitanes mexicanos bien le conosgieron y luego man- 
daron que callasen sus gentes y no tirasen varas, ni piedras, 
ni flechas, y quatro dellos se llegaron En parte q El monte- 
zuma les podia hablar y ellos a el, y llorando le dixeron, o 



424 

seffor, E iiro gran senor, y como nos pesa de todo vro mal y 
dano y de vros hijos y parientes, ha/.eraos os saber q ya Etnos 
levautado a vn vro pariente por senor, E alii le nonbro Co- 
mo se llamava, que se deziacoadlabaca, senor deyztapalapa, 
q no fue guatemuz, El que luego fue sefior, y mas dixeron 
que la guerra que la avian de acabar, E que tenian prOme- 
tido a sus ydolos de no la dexar hasta q todos nosotros rau- 
riesemos y q rrogavan cada dia A su huychilobos, E a tez- 
catepuca, q le guardase libre y sano de nro poder E como 
saliese como deseavan q no le dexarian de tener muy mejor 
q de antes por seiior y q les perdonasen/. y no ovieron bien 
Acabado El rrazonamiento quando En aquella sazon tiran 
tanta piedra, y vara, que los nros q le arrodelavan desque 
vieron q Entre tanto que hablava con ellos no davan gue- 
rra, se descuydaron vn momento de le rrodelar de presto y 
le dieron tres pedradas vna En la cabega y otra En vn brago 
y otra En vna pierna, y puesto q le rrogavan se curase y co- 
miese, y le dezian sobrello buenas palabras, no quiso, antrcs 
quando no nos catamos, vinieron a dezir q Era muerto, y 
cortes lloro por el, y todos nros Capitanes y soldados, E hon- 
bre ovo Entre nosotros, de los q le conosgiamos y tratava- 
mos, de que fue tan llorado, como si fuera nro padre y no nos 
Emos de maravillar dello, viendo q tan bueno Era, y dezian 
q avia diez y siete afios q rreynava, E que fue El mejor rrey q 
En mexico abia abido, E q por su persona abia ven§ido tres 
desaftos que tuvo sobre lastierras q soJuzgo e pasemos ade- 
lante. 



425 



CAPITULO CXXVII. desq fiie inuerto El 
grail montezuraa, Acordo cortes de hazello 
saber A sus Capitaiies y prinqipales q nos 
davan guerra, y lo q mas sobrello paso. 

pues ('Omo vimos A montezuma q se avia muerto, ya E dho 
la triste/a q En todos nosotros ovo por olio, y avn al frayle 
de la nid que sienpre Estava con el se lo tu vimos a mal no 
le atraer A que se bolviese xpiano, y el dio por descargo q 
no creyo q de aquellas heridas muriese, salvo quel debia de 
mandar q le pusiesen Alguna cosa con q se pasnio. En fin 
de mas rrazones mando cortes a vn papa, E a vn principal, de 
los questavan presos q sol tamos pa q fuesen a dezir Al 
cagiq q Algaron por sciior, q se dezia coadlabaca y a sus Ca- 
pitanes, como El gran montezuma Era muerto, y q Ellos le 
bieron morir y de la manera q murio y heridas que le die- 
ron los suyos, y dixesen como a todos nos pesava dello y que 
lo Enterrasen como a gran rrey que Era, y que algasen A su 
primo del montezuma q con nosotros Estava por rrey, pues 
le pertenes^'ia de heredar o A otros sus liijos e que Al que 
avian Alyado por senor que no le venia por derecho, E 
que tratasen pazes para salirnos de mexico q si no lo hazian 
q agora, q Era muerto montezuma A quien teniamos rres- 
peto E que por su cavsa no les destruymos su gibdad, que sal- 
driamos A dalles guerra, E A quemalles todas las casas, y 
les hariamos mucho mal, y porque lo viesen Como Era muer- 
to Al montezuma, mando a seys mexicanos, muy pringipa- 
les, y los demas papas q teniamos presos, que lo sacasen A 
cuestas y lo Entregasen A los Capitanes mexicanos, y les di- 
xesen lo quel montezuma mando Al tienpo q se queria mo- 
rir que aquellos que le llevaron A cuestas se hallaron pre- 
sente A su muerte, y dixeron Al coadlabac toda la verdad, 
como Ellos propios le mataron de tres pedradas, y desque 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo.— 55. 



426 

ansi le vieron muerto, vimos que hizieron muy gran llanto, 
q bien oyioos las gritas y avllidos, que por el davan, y avn 
con todo Esto no §eso la gran bateria q sienpre nos davan 
y era sobre nosotros, de vara y piedra y flecha, y luego la 
Encomengaron muy mayor y con gran braveza, y nos de- 
zian, Agora pagareya, muy de verdad, la muerte de nro rrey 
y senor, y El desonor de nros ydolos, y las pazes q nos En- 
biays A pedir, sail aca, y con^jertaremos Como y de q mane- 
ra an de ser, y dezian tantas palabras sobrello y de otras co- 
sas que ya no se me acuerda, y las dexare Aqui de dezir y q ya 
tenian Elegido buen rrey, y que no sera del cora^on tan fla- 
co, que le podays Enganar con palabras falsas Como fue A 
su buen montezuma.y que del Enterraraiento, q notuviese- 
mos cuydado, sino de nras vidas, q En dos dias no qneda- 
rian ningunos de nosotros, para q tales cosas les Enbiemos A 
dezir. y con estas platicas, muy grandes gritas, y silvos, y 
rro§iadas de piedras, y vara y flecha y otros muchos Esqua- 
drones todavia procurando de poner fuego a muchas partes 
de nros Aposentos. y desque aquello vio Cortes, y todos nos- 
otros, Acordamos q para otro dia saliesemos del rreal todos, 
y diesemos por otra parte A donde avia muchas casas. En 
tierra firme, y que hiziesemos todo El mal que pudiesemos 
y fuesemos hazia la calgada, y que todos los de a cavallo 
rronpiesen con los Esquadrones, y los alangeasen, o se he- 
chasen En la laguna, y avnq les matasen los cavallos, y es- 
to se ordeno para si por ventura con el dano y muerte q les 
hiziesemos, gesarian la guerra, y se trataria Alguna manera 
de paz para salir libres, sin mas muertes y danos y pifesto 
que otro dia lo hizimos todos muy varonilm*^ y matamos 
muchos contrarios, y se quemaron obra de veynte casas, y 
fuymos hasta gerca de tierra firme, todo fue nonada para el 
gran dano y muertes y heridas q nos dieron y no pudimos 
guardar ninguna puente porq todas estavan medio quebra- 
das, y cargaron muchos mexicanos sobre nosotros, y tenian 
puestas albarradas e maparos En parte a donde conosyian q 
podian Alcanyar los cavallos, por manera q si muchos tra- 
bajos teniamos hasta alii muchos mayores tuvimos adelan- 



42T 

te y dexallo E Aqui, y bolvamos a dezir, como acordamos 
de salir de mx*^^ En esta Entrada y salida que hizimos con 
los de Cavallo Era vn Jueves acuerdome q yva alii sando- 
val, y lares El buen ginete y gongalo dominguez, Juan ve- 
lazquez de leon y fran*^^ de morla, y otros buenos honbres de 
a cavallo de los nros e de los de narvaez, yban otros bu®s gi- 
netes mas estavan espantados e temerosos como no se avian 
allado en guerras de yndios. 



CAPITULO CXXVIII. Como Acordamos 
de nos yr huyendo de mexico y lo que so- 
brello se hizo. — 




OMO viamos q cada dia menguavan nras fuer^^as, y 
las de los mexicanos cresgian, E viamos muchos 
de los nros muertos y todos los mas heridos, E q 
avnque peleavamos muy Como varones no podiamos hazer 
rretirar ni q se apartasen los muchos Esquadrones que de 
dia y de noche nos daban guerra, y la polvora Apocada, y 
la comida e agua, por el consiguiente, y el gran montezuma 
•muerto, las pazes y treguas que les Enbiamos a demandar no 
las querian Agetar, En fin viamos nras muertes A los ojos, 
y las puentes questavan Algadas y fue acordado por cortes y 
por todos nros capitanes y soldados, q de noche nos fuese- 
mos quando viesemos que los Esquadrones guerreros Esta- 
van mas descuydados, y para mas les descuydar, Aquella 
tarde les Enbiamos a dezir Con vn papa de los questavan 
presos, q Era muy pringipal Entre Ellos, y con otros prisio- 
neros que nos dexen yr En paz de Ay A ocho dias, y que les 
dariamos todo El oro, y esto por desCuydarlos y salirnos 
Aquella noche. y demas desto Estava con nosotros vn sol- 
dado q se dezia botello, Al paresger muy honbre de bien y 



428 

latino, y avia Estado En rroma y dezian q Era yngruman- 
tico, otros dezian q tenia familiar Algunos le llaman Astro- 
logo y este botello avia dho quatro dias Avia, q hallava por 
sus suertes o astrologias, q si aquella noehe que venia no sa- 
liamos de mexico, q si mas Aguardavaraos, q ninguno sal- 
dria Con la vida, y avn avia dho otras vezes, q cortes avia 
de tener muchos trabajos o avia de ser desposeydo de su ser 
y honrra y que despues avia de bolver a ser gran senor, E 
yllustre de muchas rrentas, y dezia otras muchas cosas de- 
xemos al botello que despues torn are A hablar En el y dire 
como se dio luego orden q se hiziese de maderos y tablas muy 
rrezias vna puente q llevasemos para poner En las puentes 
q tenian quebradas, y para ponellas y lleballas y guardarel 
paso hasta q pasase todo El fardaje y El exergito seiialaron 
quatrozientos yndios tascaltecas, E giento E ginquenta sol- 
dados para llebar El artilleria senalaron dozientos ynd" de 
tascala e §inquenta soldados y para q fuesen En la delante- 
ra peleando senalaron A gongalo de sandoval, y a diego de 
ordas, E a frangisco de savzedo y a frangisco de lugo, e vna 
capitanya de yien soldados mayebos sueltos, para que fuesen 
entre medias y acudiesen a la parte q mas conviniese pe- 
lear, senalaron a el mismo cortes, E alonso de abila, E xpo- 
ual de oli, y a otros capitanes q fuesen en medio En la rre- 
taguardia a pedro de alvarado y a juan velazquez de leon, 
y Entremetidos En medio de dos capitanes y soldados del 
narvaez y para q llebasen A cargo los prisioneros y a doiia 
marina y doila luysa senalaron trezientos tascaltecas y treyn- 
ta soldados, pues hecho este con5ierto ya Era noche, para sa- 
car EI oro y llevallo o rrepartillo mando cortes a su cama- 
rero que se dezia xpvl de guzman y a otros soldados sus 
criados que todo El oro, y joyas y plata, lo sacasen con mu- 
chos yndios de tascala, que para Ello les dio, y lo pusieron 
en la sala y dixo a los ofigiales del rrey que se dezian alonso 
dauila y gon^alo mexia, que pusiesen cobro en el oro de su 
mag, y les dio siete cavallos heridos y cojos y vna llegua, y 
muchos amigos tascaltecas, que fueron mas de ochenta, y car- 
garon dello a bulto lo que mas pudieron llebar, que estaban 



429 

hechas barras muy anchas, como otras vezes E dicho, en el 
capitulo q dello habla, y quedava mucho oro en la salay 
hecho montones. Entonges cortes llamo a su secretario, y a 
otros escrivanos del rrey, y dixo dame por testimonio q no 
puedo mas hazer sobre este oro, aqui teniamos En este apo- 
sento y sala, sobre setegientos mill pesos de oro, y como aveys 
visto que no se puede pesar, ni poner mas En cobro, los sol- 
dados que quisieren sacar dello, desde aqui se lo doy, como 
a de quedar perdido Entre estos perros, y desque aquello oye- 
ron muchos soldados de los de narvaez, y algunos de los 
nros, cargaron dello, yo digo que no tube codigia, sino pro- 
curar de salvar la uida, mas no dexe de apafiar de vnas ca- 
xuelas q alii estavan, vnos quatro chalchuis, que son piedras, 
Entre los yndios, muy presgiadas, q de presto me Eche en 
los pechos Entre las armas, q me fueron despues buenas, pa- 
ra curar mis heridas y comer El valor dellas. pues de q supi- 
raos el con§ierto q cortes auia hecho, de la manera q auiamos 
de salir E yr aquella noche a los puentes, y como hazia algo 
oscuro, y auia niebla y lloviznava, antes de media noche se 
comengo a traer la puente, y caminar El fardage y los cava- 
Uos y la yegua, y los tascaltecas cargados con el oro y de 
presto se puso la puente, y paso cortes y los demas q consi- 
go traya primero, y muchos de cauallo, y estando En esto, 
suenan las bozes, y cornetas, y gritas y siluos de los mexica- 
nos y dezian En su lengua a los del tatelulco, sali presto con 
vras canoas q se van los teules y atajaldos q no quede ningu- 
no a uida, y quando no me cato, uimos tantos esquadrones 
de guerreros, sobre nosotros, y toda la laguna quajada de ca- 
noas, — que no nos podiamos valer, y muchos de nros solda- 
dos ya auian pasado y estando desta manera cargan tanta 
multitud de mexicanos a quitar la puente y a herir y matar 
en los nros, que no se daban a manos, y como la desdicha es 
mala En tales tienpos, ocurre vn mal sobre otro, como llouia 
rresbalaron dos cavallos, y caen En la laguna, y como aque- 
llo vimos yo y otros de los de cortes, nos pusimos En salbo 
de Esa parte de la puente y cargaron tanto guerrero, que por 
bien q peleauamos, no se pudo mas aprovechar de la puente, 



430 

por manera que En aquel paso y abertura de agua, de pres- 
to se hincho de cauallos muertos, y de yndios E yndias y 
naborias, y fardaje y petacas, y temiendo no nos acabasen de 
matar, tiramos por nra calgada adelante, y hallamos muchos 
esquadrones q estauan aguardandonos con langas grandes y 
nos dezian palabras vitupiriosas, y entre ellas dezian o cuy- 
lones, y avn bibos quedais, y a estocadas y cuchilladas que 
les davamos pasamos avnque hirieron alii a seis de los q yua- 
mos, pues quisa avia algun congierto como lo aviamos con- 
9ertado, maldito aquel porque cortes y los capitanes y solda- 
dos que pasaron primero a cauallo por salvarse y llegar a 
tierra firme y asegurar sus vidas aguijaron por la calgada ade- 
lante, y no la herraron, tanbien salieron En salbo los cava- 
llos con el oro y los tascaltecas, y digo, que si aguardaramos, 
ansi los da cavallo, como los soldados, vnos a otros, en las 
puentes, todos fenesgieramos que no quedara ninguno a uida, 
y la causa es esta, porque yendo por la cal§ada ya que arre- 
metiamos a los esquadrones mexicanos, de la vna parte es 
^S^^y y ^^ 1^ ^*^ra parte agoteas, y la laguna llena de canoas, ^ 
no podiamos hazer cosa ninguna, pues escopetas y ballestas 
todas quedaban en la puente, y siendo de noche, que podia- 
mos hazer sino lo que haziamos que hera arremeter y dar 
algunas cuchilladas a los que nos venian a Echar mano, y 
andar y pasar adelante hasta salir de las calgadas, y si fuera 
de dia muy peor fuera y avn los que escapamos fue nro se- 
fior seruido dello, y para quien no vio aquella noche la mul- 
titud de guerreros que sobre nosotros estavan, y las canoas 
que dellos andavan, arrebatar nros soldados, es cosa despan- 
to, ya que yuamos por nra calgada adelante cabe el pueblo 
de tacuba a donde ya estaua cortes con todos los capitanes 
gongalo de sandoval y xpvl de oli y otros da cauallo de los 
que pasaron delante dezian a bozes, senor capitan aguarde- 
mos, que dizen que vamos huyendo y los dexamos morir en 
las puentes, tornemoslos a anparar, si algunos an quedado 
y no salen ni vienen ninguno, y la rrespuesta de cortes fue, 
que los que auiamos salido hera milagro, y luego boluio 
con los da cauallo, y soldados que no estavan heridos, y no 



431 

anduuieron mucho trecho porq luego vino pedro de alvarado 
bien herido a pie con una langa en la mano, porque la ye- 
giia alazana ya se la auian muerto, y tray a consigo quatro 
soldados tan heridos como El, y ocho tascaltecas, todos co- 
rriendo sangre de muchas heridas, y entre tanto que fue cor- 
tes por la calzada, con los demas capitanes, rreparamos e los 
patios de tacuba, ya auian venido de mexico muchos esqua- 
drones, dando bozes, a dar mandado, a tacuba, y a otro pue- 
blo que se dize escapulgalco, por manera que Encomen(;aron 
a tirar vara y piedra y flecha y con sus lan§as grandes y nos- 
otros haziamos algunas arremetidas En que nos defendiamos 
y ofendiamos. bolvamos al pedro de alvarado, que como cor- 
tes y los demas capitanes le econtraron de aquella manera, 
y uieron que no venian mas soldados, se le saltaron las la- 
grimas de los ojos, y dixo p^ de alvarado que Joan velazqz de 
leon quedo muerto con otros muchos cavalleros, ansi de los 
nros como de los de narvaez, que fueron mas de ochenta en 
la puente, y que el y los quatro soldados que consigo traya, 
que desque les mataron los cavallos, pasaron la puente co 
mucho peligro, sobre muertos, y cavallos y petacas, questa- 
ba aquel paso de la puente, cuajado dellos, y dixo mas El 
que todas las puentes y calgadas estavan llenas de guerre- 
ros, y En la triste puente que dixeron despues, que fue el 
salto de alvarado digo, que En aquel tienpo ningun soldado 
se paraua a vello si saltaua poco o mucho porque harto te- 
niamos que salvar nras vidas, porque Estavamos En gran 
peligro de muerte, segund la multitud de mexicanos que so- 
bre nosotros cargavan y todo lo que En aquel caso dize go- 
mora, es burla, porque ya que quisiera sal tar y sustentarse 
e la lanya estaua El agua muy honda, y no podia llegar al 
suelo con Ella y demas de esto la puente y abertura muy an- 
cha y alta, que no la podria salvar por muy mas suelto que 
hera ni sobre langa ni de otra manera y bien se puede ver 
agora, q tan alta yua El agua En aquel tienpo y q tan altas 
son las pared es donde estavan las vigas de la puente, y q tan 
ancha era El abertura, y nunca oy dezir deste salto de alva- 
rado, hasta despues de ganado mexico, q fue En vnos nibe- 



432 

los que puso un gon§alo de ocanpo, q por ser algo feos aqui 
no declare, y En ellos dize, y dacordarse te deuia del salto, 
que diste de la puente y no declaro mas e esta tecla. paseinos 
adelante y dire como estando en tacuba, se avian aJuntado 
muclios guerreros mexicanos de todos aquellos pueblos y nos 
mataron alii tres soldados acordamos lo mas presto que pu- 
diesemos salir de aquel pueblo, y con ^tinco yndios tascalte- 
cas, que atinavan al camino de tascala, sin yr por camino, 
nos guiauan con mucho con^ierto, hasta que llegauamos a 
vnas caserias que e vn sorro estavan, y alii junto vn cu su 
adoratorio como fortale/.a a donde rreparamos quiero tornar 
a dezir que seguidos que yuamos de los mexicanos y de las 
flechas y varas, y pedradas que con sus hondas nos tiravan, 
y como nos gercavan, dando sienpre En nosotros, es cosa des- 
pantar y como lo E dho muchas vezes, y estoy harto de lo 
dezir los letores no lo tengan por cosa de proligidad, por cav- 
sa que cada vez o cada rrato que nos apretavan y herian, y 
davan rrezia guerra, por fuerga tengo de tornar a dezir de 
los esquadrones que nos seguian y matauan muchos de nos- 
otros. dexemoslo ya de traer tanto a la memoria, y digamos 
qomo nos defendiamos En aquel cu E fortaleza, nos alverga- 
mos, y se curaron los heridos y con muchas lunbres que he- 
zimos, pues de comer, ni por pensamiento, y en aquel cu y 
adoratorio, despues de ganada la gran ^ibdad de mexico, he- 
zimos vna yglesia, que se dize nra sra de los remedios, muy 
debota, y van agora alii En rrom^^ria, y a tener novenas, 
muchos vezinos, y senoras de mexico dexemos esto y bolva- 
mos a dezir, que lastima hera de ver curar y apretar con al- 
gunos panos de mantas nras heridas, y como se auian rres- 
friado y estavan hinchadas dolian, pues mas de Uorar fue 
los cavalleros y esforyados soldados que faltavan, ques de 
Joan velazqz de leon fran'*'' de sauzedo, y fran*^ de morla, y 
vn lares El buen ginete, y otros muchos de los nros de cor- 
tes, para que cuento yo estos pocos, porque para escreuir los 
nonbres de los muchos que de nosotros faltaron es no acabar 
tan presto, pues de los de narvaez todos los mas en las puen- 
tes quedaron, cargados de oro, digamos aora El astrologo bo- 



433 

tello, no le aprovecho su astrologia, que tanbien alii murio 
con 8U cavallo, pasemos adelante, y dire como se hallaron en 
vna petaca deste botello, despues questuuimos En salvo, vnos 
papeles como libro, con gifras y rrayas, y apuntamyentos, y 
sefiales, que dezia e ellas, si me de morir aqui En esta triste 
guerra En poder destos perros yndios, y dezia En otras rra- 
yas y Qifras mas adelante, no moriras; y tornaua a dezir En 
otras ^ifras y rrayas y apuntamyentos, si moriras y rrespon- 
dia la otra rraya no moriras, y dezia En otra parte, si me an 
de matar tanbien mi caballo, dezia adelante si mataran, y 
desta manera tenia otras como ^ifras y a manera de suertes 
que hablaban vnas letras contra otras, En aquellos pape- 
les, que hera como libro chico, y tanbien se hallo e la peta- 
ca vna natura Como de honbre de obra de vn geme, hecha 
de baldres, ni mas ni menos al pare^er de natura de honbre 
y tenia dentro como vna borra de lana de tundidor tornemos 
a dezir como quedaron e las puentes muertos, ansi los hi- 
jos y hijas del monte§uma, como los prisioneros que traya- 
mos, y El cacamatzin, senor de tezcuco y otros rreyes de pro- 
vingias dexemos ya de contar tantos trabajos y digamos como 
estavamos pensando e lo que por delante teniamos, y hera 
que todos estabamos heridos, y no escaparon sino veynte E 
tres caballos, pues los tiros, y artilleria, y polvora no saca- 
mos ninguna, las ballestas fueron pocas, y Esas se rremedia- 
ron luego las cuerdas, E hezimos saetas, pues lo. peor de to- 
do hera^ que no sabiamos la voluntad que auiamos de hallar 
En nros amigos los de tascala, demas desto aquella noche 
sienpre 9ercados de mexicanos y gritas, y varas y flechas, con 
hondas, sobre nosotros, acordamos de nos salir de alii, a 
media noche, y con los tascaltecas, nras guias por delante 
con muy buen congierto, caminar los heridos En medio y 
los coxos con bordones, y algunos que no podian andar y es- 
tavan m.uy malos a ancas de caballos de los que yuan coxos, 
que no heran para batallar, y los de a cavallo que no estavan 
heridos, delante, E a vn lado y a otro rrepartidos, y desta 
manera todos nosotros los q mas sanos estabamos, haziendo 
rrostro y cara a los mexicanos, y los tascaltecas heridos, den- 

Bernal Dlax del Ca8tmo.~66. 



434 

tro del cuerpo de nro esquadron, y los demas quest-avan sa- 
nos, hazian cara juntamente con nosotros, porque los mexi- 
canos nos yuan sienpre picando, con grandes bozes y gritos," 
y siluos y dezian alia, yreys donde no quede ninguno de vo- 
sotros a uida, y no Entendiamos a que fin lo dezian segun 
adelante veran pues olvidado me E de escreuir el contento 
que rreyibimos de ver biba a nra dofia marina y a dona luy- 
sa la hija de xicotenga, que las escaparon e las puentes vnos 
tascaltecas, y tanbien vna muger que se dezia maria de es- 
trada, que no teniamos otra muger de castilla En mexico si- 
no aquella, y los que las escaparon, y salieron primero de las 
puentes, fueron vnos hijos del xicotenga hermanos de la dona 
luisa y quedaron muertas las mas De nras naborias, q nos 
abian dado En tascala, y en la mesma §ibdad de mexico. y 
bolbamos a dezir como Uegamos aquel dia, a vnas estangias 
y caserias de vn pueblo grande que se dize gualtitan, El qual 
pueblo despues, de ganado mexico, fue de alonso dauila, y 
avnque nos dauan grita y bozes, y tiravan piedra, y vara, 
y flecha, todo lo soportamos, y desde alii fuymos por vnas 
caserias y poblezuelos y sienpre los mexicanos siguiendonos, 
y como se junta van muchos, procuraban de nos matar, y nos 
comengavan a §ercar y tiraban tanta de piedra con hondas, 
y uaras y flechas, y con sus montantes, que mataron a dos 
de nros soldados. En vn paso malo, y tanbien mataron vn 
caballo y hirieron a muchos de los nros, y tanbien nosotros 
a estocadas y cuchilladas matamos algunos dellos, y los de a 
cavallo lo mismo, y ansi dormimos En aquellas casas, y co- 
mimos el cavallo que mataron, y otro dia muy de mafiana, 
comengamos a caminar con el congierto que de antes yva- 
mos y avn mejor, y sienpre la mitad de los de a caballo ade- 
lante, E poco mas de vna legua, de alii, e vn llano, yaque 
creyamos yr En salbo, buelven nros corredores del canpo, 
que yvan descubriendo y dizen que estan los canpos Uenos 
de guerreros mexicanos aguardandonos, E quando lo oymos 
bien que teniamos temor pero no para desmayar ni dexarde 
econtrarnos con EUos y pelear hasta morir, y alii rrepara- 
mos vn poco, y se dio horden como se avia de entrar E sa- 



486 

lir los da cavallo, a media rrienda, y que no se parasen a 
lan§ear sino las langas por rrostros, hasta rronper sus esqua- 
drones, E que todos los soldados, las estocadas que diesemos, 
q les pasasemos las entranas, y que hiziesemos de manera 
que vengasemos muy bien nras muertes y heridas por mane- 
ra que si dios fuese seruido escapasemos con las uidas y des- 
pues de nos encomendar a dios, E a santa maria muy de cora- 
§on E ynbocando El nonbre de senor Santiago, desque vimos 
que nos comen§avan a §erear de §inco En 9inco de caballo 
rronpieron por Ellos, y todos nosotros juntamente, o que cosa 
hera de ver esto tan temerosa y rronpida batalla, como an- 
davamos tan rrebueltos con Ellos pie con pie y que cuchi- 
lladas y estocadas les dauamos, y con que furia los perros 
peleavan, y que herir y matar hazian En nosotros, con sus 
lan9as y macanas y espadas de dos manos, y los de cavallo, 
como hera el canpo llano como alan§eavan a su placer En- 
trando y saliendo, y avnque estavan heridos Ellos y sus ca- 
ballos, no dexaban de batallar muy como varones esfor§ados, 
pues todos nosotros los que no teniamos caballos, pares§e ser 
q a todos se nos ponia doblado esfuer§o que avnque estaba- 
mos heridos y de rrefresco teniamos otras heridas no cura- 
vamos de las apretar, por no nos parar a Ello, que no avia 
lugar, sino con grandes animos apechucabamos con Ellos a 
les dar destocadas, pues quiero dezir como Cortes, y xpvl de 
oli, y gon§alo de sandoval, y gon§alo dominguez y vn j° de sa- 
lamanca quales andavan a vna parte E a otra y avnque bien 
heridos rronpiendo esquadrones, y las palabras que cortes 
dezia a los que andauamos Enbueltos.con Ellos, que la esto- 
cada o cuchillada que diesemos fuese En senores sefialados, 
porque todos trayan grandes penachos de oro y rricas armas 
y deuisas, pues ver como nos esfor§aba el valiente y animo- 
so sandoval E dezia, Ea sefiores, que oy es el dia q hemos 
de vender, tened esperan§a en dios q saldremos de aqui bi- 
bos, para algun buen fin, y tornare a dezir los muchos de 
nros soldados q nos matavan y herian, y dexemos esto y bol- 
bamos a cortes y xpvl de oli, y sandoval, y gon§alo domin- 
guez, y otros de a cavallo, que aqui no nonbro, y joan de sa- 



436 

lamanca, y todos los soldados poniamos grande animo a 
cortes para pel ear. y esto nro seiior Jesuxpo E nra senora la 
virgen santa maria, nos lo ponia En coragon y sefior Santia- 
go, que giertamente nos ayudaua, y quiso dios que allego 
cortes con los capitanes ya por mi memorados, que andavan 
En su conpania, En parte donde andaua con su grande as- 
quadron, El capitan general de los mexicanos, con su ban- 
dera tendida, con rricas armas de oro y grandes penachos de 
argenteria, y desque le uio cortes, con otros muchos mexi- 
canos que heran prin§ipales, que todos trayan grandes pe- 
nachos, dixo a gon§alo de sandoval, y a xpovl de oli y a 
gon§alo dominguez, y a los demas capitanes, Ea sefiores rron- 
pamos por Ellos y no quede ninguno dellos sin herida, y en- 
comendadose a dios, arremetio cortes y xpvl de oli, y sandoval 
y alonso dauila, y otros cavalleros, y cortes dio vn encuen- 
tro con el cauallo al capitan mexicano, que le hizo abatir su 
vandera, y los demas nros capitanes acabaron de rronper El 
esquadron, que heiran muchos yndios, y quien siguio al ca- 
pitan q traya la vandera, que avn no auia cdydo del encuen- 
tro que cortes le dio, fue Joan de salamanca, ya por mi non- 
brado, que andaua con cortes, con vna buena yegua hobera, 
que le dio vna lan§ada, y le quito El rrico penacho que traya 
E se lo dio luego a cortes, diziendo que pues el lo encontro 
primero, y lo hizo abatir la vandera y le hizo perder el brio 
del pelear de sus gentes, que aquel penacho Era suyo, mas 
desde a obra de tres afios su mg se lo dio por armas al sala- 
manca, y lo tienen sus desgendientes En sus rreposteros. bol- 
bamos a nra batalla, q nro sefior dios fue seruido que muerto 
aquel capitan, que traya la vandera mexicana, y otros mu- 
chos que alii murieron, aflojo su batallar y todos los de a 
cauallo siguiendolos y ni teniamos hanbre ni sed, sino q pa- 
res(;ia q no abiamos abido ni pasado ningun mal ni trabajo 
seguimos la vitoria matando E hiriendo, pues nros amigoe los 
de tascala, estavan hechos vnos leones, y con sus espadas y 
montantes, y otras armas q AUi Apafiaron hazianlo ^ muy 

1 Testado en el original: *'mara villas/' 



bien y esforgadamente ya bueltos los de a cavallo de seguir 
la vitoria, todos dimes muchas gragias a dios, q Escapamos 
de tan gran multitud de gente, porq no se abia visto ni ha- 
llado En todas las yndias, En batalla q se aya dado, tan 
gran numero de guerreros juntos, porq alii estava la flor de 
mx** y de tezcuco y todos los pueblos questan al rrededor 
de la laguna y otros muchos sus comarcanos y los de otunba 
y tepetezcuco y saltocan ya con pensami^ q de aquella vez 
no quedar rroso ni velloso de nosotros, pues q armas tan 
rricas q trayan con tanto oro y penachos y debisas y to- 
dos los mas capitanes y personas prin§ipales, alii Junto don- 
de fue esta rrefiida y nonbrada batalla para en estas partes 
ansi se puede dezir pues dios nos escapo con las bidas, esta- 
ba vn pueblo q se dize otunba, la qual batalla tienen muy 
bien pintada, y En rretratos Entallada, los mexicanos y 
tascaltecas Entre otras muchas batallas q con los mexica- 
nos ovimos, hasta q ganamos a mexico, y tengan aten§ion 
los curiosos letores qsto leyeren q quiero traer aqui a la me- 
moria q quando Entramos Al socorro de p^ de albarado En 
mex*^ fuymos por todos, sobre mas de mill e trezientos sol- 
dados con los de a cavallo q fueron noventa y siete, y ochen- 
ta ballesteros, y otros tanto escopeteros e mas de dos mill tas- 
caltecas y metimos mucha artilleria, y fue nra Entrada En 
mexico, dia de sefior san Ju*^ de Junio, de mill E quinien- 
tos y veynte anos, fue nra salida huyendo A diez del mes de 
Jullio del dho afio, y fue esta nonbrada batalla de otunba, a 
catorze del mes de Jullio. digamos agora ya q Escapamos de 
todos los trances, por mi atras dhos quiero dar otra quenta 
que tantos nos mataron, ansi En mex~ como En puentes y 
cal9adas, Como En todos los rreEncuentros y En esta de 
otunba y los q mataron por los caminos, digo q En obra de §in- 
co dias fueron muertos y sacrificados, sobre ocho^ientos y se- 
senta soldados, con setenta y dos q mataron En vn pueblo 
q se dize tustepeq y a yinco mugeres de castilla, y estos q 
mataron en tustepeq eran de los de narvaez, y mataron so- 
bre mill ^ tascaltecas./ tanbien quiero dezir como En aqlla 

1 Testado en el original: "y quinientos/' 



488 

sazon mataron a vn Juan de alcantara, El viejo, con otros 
tres vezinos de la villa rrica q venian por las partes del oro 
q les cabia, de lo qual tengo hecha rrelagion En el capitulo 
que dello trata, por manera q tanbien perdieron las vidas, 
y avn el oro, y si miramos En ello, todos, comunm*® ovimos 
mal gozo de las partes del oro q nos dieron, y si de los de 
narvaez murieron muchos mas q de los de cortes en las puen- 
tes fue por salir cargados de oro q con el peso dello no po- 
dian salir ni nadar, dexemos de hablar En esta materia y 
digamos como y vamos ya muy alegres, y comiendo vnas ca- 
laba§as q llaman ayotes, y comiendo y caminando hazia tas- 
cala q por salir de aquellas poblazones por temor no se tor- 
nasenajuntar Esquadrones mexicanos q avn todavia nos 
davan grita, En partes q no ppdiamos ser sefiores dellos, y 
nos tiraban mucha piedra con hondas y vara y flecha hasta 
q fuymos A otras caserias y pueblo chico y alii estaba vn 
buen Cu y casa fuerte donde rreparamos aquella noche y nos 
Curamos nras heridas y estuvimos Con mas rreposo, y avnq 
sienpre teniamos Esquadrones de mexicanos q nos seguian 
mas ya no se osavan llegar y aquellos q venian Era como 
quien dize alia yreys fuera de nra trra, y desde aqlla pobla- 
zon y casa donde dormimos se pares§ian las serrezuelas qsta 
cabe tascala y como las vimos nos alegramos, como si fueran 
nras casas, pues quiga sabiamos §ierto que nos abian de ser 
leales, o q boluntad ternian, o q abia aconte§ido a los qsta- 
van poblados En la villa rrica si Eran muertos o bivos, y 
cortes nos dixo, q pues Eramos pocos, q no qdamos sino 
quatrogientos y quarenta con veynte cavallos y doze valleste- 
ros, y siete escopeteros y no teniamos polvora, y todos heri- 
dos y coxos y mancos q mirasemos muy bien como nro se- 
fior Jesuxpo fue suido de escaparnos con las vidas, por lo 
qual sienpre le Emos de dar muchas gra§ias y loores, y que 
bolvimos otra vez a desmynuyrnos En el numero y copia de 
los soldados q con el pasamos y q prim^ Entramos En mx~ 
quatro§ientos soldados y q nos rrogava q En tascala no les 
hiziesemos Enojo, ni se les tomase ninguna cosa y esto dio 
a Entender a los de narvaez, porq no estavan acostunbra- 



439 

dos A ser sujetos a capitanes En las guerras como nosotros, 
y mas dixo q tenia Esperanga En dios q los allariamos bue- 
nos y may leales, E que si otra cosa fuese, la q dios no per- 
mita, q nos an de tornar Andar los pufios con cora9ones 
fuertes y bragos bigorosos y que para eso fuesemos muy 
Aper§ebidos y nros corredores del canpo Adelante llegamos 
a vna fuente questava En vna ladera, y alii estavan vnas 
como §ercas y manparos de tienpos viejos, y dixeron nros 
Amigos los tascaltecas q Alii partian terminos Entre los me- 
xicanos y ellos, y de buen rreposo, nos paramos a lavar y a 
comer de la miseria q abiamos avido y luego comengamos 
a marchar y fuymos a vn pueblo de tascaltecas que se dize 
guaolipar donde nos rres§ibieron y davan de comer mas no 
tanto q si no se lo pagavamos con algunas pezezuelas de oro 
y chalchihuis que llevamos algunos de nosotros, no nos lo 
davan de balde y alii estuvimos vn dia rreposando curando 
nras heridas y ansi mismo curamos los cavallos, pues desq 
lo supieron En la cabeQera de tascala luego vino mase Esca- 
§i, y xicotenga El viejo e chichimecatecle e otros muchos ca- 
§iques y prin^ipales y todos los mas sus vezinos de guaxo- 
gingo, y como llegaron aquel pueblo donde estavamos fueron 
abra§ar a cortes y a todos nros capitanes y soldados y lloran- 
do algunos dellos Especial El mase Escagi E xicotenga E 
chichimecatecle e tapaneca dixeron a cortes o malinche, ma- 
linche, y como nos pesa de vro mal y de todos vros herma- 
nos y de los muchos de los nros q con vosotros an muerto ya 
OS lo hg^biamos dho muchas ve§es q no os fiasedes de gente 
mexicana porq vn dia o otro os avian de dar guerra no me 
quisistes creer, ya hecho es, no se puede al presente hazer 
mas de curaros y daros de comer en vras casas estays des- 
cansa E yremos luego a nro pueblo y os apogentaremos, y 
no pienzes malinche, q as h^cho poco En escaparcon lasvi- 
das, de aqlla tan fuerte §ibdad E sus puentes E yo te digo q 
si de antes os teniamos per muy esforgados, agora os tengo 
en mucho mas. bien se q lloraran muchas mugeres E yn- 
dias destos nros pueblos las muertes DE sus hijos y mari- 
dos y hermanos y parientes, no te congoxes por ello, y mu- 



440 

cho deves a tus dioses que te an Aportado aqui y salido de 
Entre tanta multitud de guerreros que os aguardaban En lo 
de otunba que quatro dias avia que lo supe que os esperar 
van para os matar yo qria yr En vra busca con treynta mill 
guerreros de los nros y no pude salir A cavsa q no estava- 
mos Juntos e los andavan juntado. Cortes y todos nros capi- 
tanes y soldados los abra^amos y les dijimos que se lo tenia* 
mos En md y Cortes les dio A todos los prin^ipales Joyas de 
oro y piedras que todavia se Escaparon cada qual soldado lo 
que pudo y ansi mismo dimos Algunos de nosotros a nros 
conos^idos de lo q teniamos pues q fiesta y que alegria mos- 
traron con dona luysa y dofia marina desq las vieron En sal- 
vamento, y q llorar y tristeza tenian por los demas yndios 
q no venian q qdaron muertos En espe9ial El mase esca^i 
por su hija dona elbira y Uorava la muerte de Juan velaz- 
quez de leon A quien la dio y desta manera fuymos a la ca- 
be9era de Tascala con todos los Ca9ique8 y Cortes Aposenta- 
ron En las casas de mase Esca^i y xicotenga dio sus Aposentos 
a pedro de alvarado y alii nos Curamos y tornamos a con- 
bale9er y avn se murieron quatro soldados de las heridas y 
a otros soldados no se les abian sanado y dexallo Aqui y di- 
re lo q mas pasamos — 



CAPITULO CXXVII [CXXIX] Como fui- 
mos A la cabeqera y mayor pueblo de tas- 
cala y lo q AUi pasamos — 

pues Como avia vn dia questavanxos En el poblezuelo de gua- 
lipar y los Caciques de tascala por mi memorados nos hizie- 
ron Aquellos ofresgimi^'s q son dinos de no olvidar y de ser 
gratificados y hechos En tal tienpo y coyuntura y despues 
que fuimos a la cabe5era y pueblo de tascala nos Aposenta- 
ron como dho tengo parece ser Cortes pregunto por el oro 
que avian traydo Alii que Eran quarenta mill pesos. El qual 



441 

oro fueron las partes de los vezinos q qdavan En la villa rri- 
ca y dixo mas Esca§i E xicotenga El viejo E vn soldado de 
los nros q se avia alii quedado doliente q no se alio e lo de me- 
xico quado nos desbarataron q avian venido de la villa rrica 
vn Joan de alcantara E otros dos veyinos E que lo llevaron 
todo porque trayan cartas de cortes para q se lo diesen la 
qual carta mostro El soldado q avia dexado en poder del mase 
Escatzi quando le dieron El oro y preguntando que como y 
quando y En q tienpo lo llevo y sabido q fue por la cuenta 
de los dias q nos daban guerra los mexicanos luego erftendi- 
mos como En el camino los avian muerto y tomado El oro y 
cortes hizo sentimiento por ello ^ y tanbien estavamos con 
pena por no saber de los de la villa rrica no oviesen corrido 
Algun desman y luego y En posta Escrivio con tres tascal- 
tecas En q les hizo saber los grandes peligros En q nos avia- 
mos visto e mex^, y como y de que manera escapamos con 
las vidas y no se les dio rrelagion quantos faltaban de los 
nros E que mirasen q sienpre estuviesemos Alerta y se vela- 
sen y q si oviesen Algunos soldados sanos que se los En- 
biasen y que guardasen muy bien Al narvaez, o si oviese pol- 
vora o ballestas porq queria tornar A correr los rrededores de 
mexico, y tanbien escribio Al que quedo por guarda y capi- 
tan de la mar que se dize caballero, y q mirasen no se fue- 
sen ningun navio A cuba, ni narvaez y que si viese que dos 
navios de los de narvaez que quedaban y no estavan para 
navegar, que diere con ellos al traves y le Enbiasen con ellos 
a los marineros con todas las Armas que tuviesen y En pos- 
ta fueron y bolvieron los mensageros y truxeron cartas como 
no abian tenido guerras, E que su Juan de alcantara ni los 
dos vezinos q Enbiaron por el oro q le deben de aber muer- 
to En el camino y q bien supieron la guerra q En mexico 
nos dieron porquel cagique gordo de §enpoal se lo abia dho 
E ansi mismo Escribio El almirante de la mar que se dezia 
caballero y dijeron que haria lo que cortes le mandava E 



1 Tachado en el original: **porq pensava de Enbiar A la ysla de xamayca 
por cavallos y polvora y vallestas.*' 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo.— 57. 



442 

quel vn navio Estava bueno y que al otro daria Al travez 
E enviaria la gente E que abia pocos marineros porq abian 
adoles§ido y se avian muerto E que Agora escrevian las rres- 
puestas de las cartas E que luego vernia El socorro q Enbian 
de la villa rrica y con quatro de la uilla honbres de la mar 
q todos fueron siete y venia por capitan dellos vn soldado q 
se dezia len^ero cuya fue la venta q Agora se dize de lenze- 
ro y quando llegaron a tascala como venian dolientes y fla- 
cos muchas vezes por nro pasatienpo y burlar dellos dezia- 
mos El socorro de lengero q venian siete soldados y los §in- 
co ypates e llenos de bubas y los dos hinchados con grandes 
barrigas dexemos burlas y digamos lo que alii En tascala nos 
Aconte^io Co xicotenga El mozo y de su mala voluntad El 
q abia sido capitan de todo tascala quando nos dieron las 
guerras, por mi otras vezes dhas En el capitulo que dello 
habla y el caso es q como se supo En aquella su ^ibdad que 
salimos huyendo de mexico y que nos avian muerto mucha 
copia de soldados Ansi de los nros como de los yndios tas- 
caltecas que avian ido de tascala En nra conpania E que 
veniamos A nos socorrer E anparar En aquella provin§ia, El 
Xicotenga el moyo andava conbocando A todos sus parientes 
E amigos E a otros q sentia q Eran de su pargialidad y les 
dezia q en vna noche o de dia quando mas Aparejado tien- 
po viesen q nos matasen y Aria Amistades Con el sefior de 
mex^ q En aquella sazon Abian Algado por rrey q se dezia 
coadlavaca y que demas de esto, q de las mantas y rropa q 
•abiamos dexado En tascala A guardar y el oro q agora saca- 
bamos de mexico ternian q rrobar y qdarian todos rricos con 
ello lo qual alcanyo A saber el viejo xicotenga su padre y se 
lo rrino y le dixo, q no le pasase tal por pensamiento que Era 
mal hecho y q si lo Alcangase a saber mase Escagi y chichi- 
mecatecle o otros senores de tascala q por ventura le m ata- 
ri an y a los q En tal conyierto fuesen y por mas quel padre 
se lo rrifio no curava de lo q le dezia y todavia Entendia En 
su mal proposito y vino A oydas de chichimecatecle q Era 
su Enemigo mortal del mogo xicotenga y lo dixo a mase Es- 
catzi y Acordaron de Entrar En aCuerdo e consultado sobre 



443 

ello y llamaron Al xicotenga El viejo y los Caciques de gua- 
xogingo y mandaron traer preso ante si A xicotenga El mo- 
50 y mase Escatzi propuso vn razonami^ delante de todos y 
dixo q si se les Acordaba o avian oydo dezir demas de gient 
afios hasta Entonges, q En todo tascala avian estado tan pros- 
peros y rrieos como desq los tevles vinieron a sus trras ni En 
todas las provin§ias avian sido En tanto tenidos y q tenian 
mucha rropa de algodon e oro y comian sal, y por doquiera 
q yvan sus tascaltecas con los tevles les hazian honrra por 
rrespeto de los tevles puesto q Agora les avian muerto En 
mexico muchos y q tengan En la memoria lo q sus antepa- 
sados les abian dho muchos aiios atras, que de adonde sale 
El sol avian de venir honbres q les avian de senorear E q 
A que cavsa Agora Andava xicotenga En aqllas traygio- 
nes y maldades congertando de nos dar guerra y matarnos q 
Era mal hecho E que no podia dar ninguna desculpa de sus 
bellaquerias y maldades q sienpre tenia Engerradas En su 
pecho q Agora q nos bia venir de aqlla manera desbaratados 
q nos avia de ayudar para en estando sanos bolver sobre los 
pueblos de mx"^ sus Enemigos, queria hazer aquella tray§ion 
y a estas palabras quel mase Escatzin E su padre xicotenga 
El giego le dixeron El xicotenga El mogo rrespondio que 
Era muy bien Acordado lo quel dezia por tener pages con 
mexicanos y dixo otras Cosas q no las pudieron gufrir y lue- 
go se levanto el mase Escatzi y El chichimecatecle y El viejo 
de su padre giego como estaba, y toman al xicotenga El mo- 
90 por los Cabegones y de las mantas e se las ronpieron E 
anpujones y con palabras ynJuriosas q le dixeron le Echa- 
ron de las gradas Abajo y las mantas todas rronpidas y avn 
si, por el padre no fuera, le querian matar E a los demas 
que avian sido En su Consejo Echaron presos e como esta- 
vamos alii reunydos e no era tpo de le Castigar no oso cor- 
tes ablar mas. E traydo aqui Esto A la memoria para que 
vean quanta lealtad y buenos fueron los de tascala y quanto 
les devemos y avn Al buen viejo xicotenga q A su hiJo diz- 
que le avia mandado matar desq supo sus tramas E trayzion. 
dexemos esto y digamos Como avia veynte y dos dias q Es- 



444 

tabamos En aquel pueblo curandonos nras heridas y pre- 
vales^iendo, E Acordo Cortes que fuesemos A la provin§ia 
de tepeaca questava §erca porq alii abian muerto muchos de 
nros soldados y de los de narvaez q se venian A mexico y 
En otros pueblos questan Junto de tepeaca que se dize ca- 
chula y como Cortes lo dixo A nros capitanes y apergebian 
a los soldados de narvaez pa yr a la gerra y como no Eran 
Acostunbrados a guerras y avian Escapado de la derrota de 
mexico y puentes y lo de otunba y no vian la ora de se bol- 
ver a la ysla de cuba A sus yndios E minas de oro rrenega- 
ban de cortes y de sus conquistas Espegial El andres de due- 
ro, conpanero de nro Cortes, porq ya lo abran Entendido los 
curiosos letores, En dos vezes q lo E declarado, En los Capi- 
tulos pasados como y de q manera fue la conpania malde- 
zian el oro q le avia dado A el y a los demas capitanes q todo 
se avia perdido En las puentes, y Como Avian visto las gran- 
des guerras q nos davan y con aver escapado con las vidas 
Estavan muy contentos, E Acordaron de dezir A cortes q no 
querian yr A tepeAca ni A guerra ninguna sino q se querian 
bolver A sus casas y q bastava lo q avian perdido en av*" be- 
nido de Cuba y cortes les hablo sobre ello muy mansa y amo- 
rosamente creyendo de los atraer para q fuesen Con nosotros 
a lo de tepeaca y por mas platicas y reprensiones q les dio no 
qrian y desq vieron q con cortes no Aprovechava sus pala- 
bras le hizieron vn rrequirimiento En forma delante de vn 
escribano del rrey, para q luego se fuese a la villa rrica y de- 
xase la gerra, poniendole por delante q no teniamos cavallos 
ni escopetas, ni vallestas, ni polvora, ni hilo para hazer Cuer- 
das, ni almazen que estavan todos heridos y q no avian qda- 
do por todos nros soldados E los de narvaez sino quatrogien- 
tos y quarenta soldados q los mexicanos nos tomarian los 
puestos y sierras y pasos y q los navios si mas Aguardavan 
se comerian de bromas, y dixeron En el rrequirimiento otras 
muchas cosas y desq se ovieron dado y leydo A Cortes si mu- 
chas palabras dezian En el muy muchas mas contrariedades 
rrespondio y demas desto, todos los mas de los nros de los q 
abiamos pasado con cortes le diximos q mirase q no diese la 



445 

li§en§ia A ninguno de los de narvaez ni A otras personas, 
para bolver A cuba, sino que procurasemos, todos de servir A 
dios E al rrey E questo Era lo bueno y no bolverse A cuba. 
desque cortes ovo rrespondido al rrequirimiento y desq vie- 
ron las personas q le estavan rrequiriendo q muchos de nos- 
otros le ayudavamos de buena a Cortes y que les Estorva- 
riamos sus ynportunagiones q sobrello le hablaban e rreqrian 
no mas de dezir q no es sui® de dios y de su magestad q de- 
xen desman parado su capitan En las guerras. En fin de mu- 
chas rrazones q pasaron obedesgieron pa yr con nosotros A 
las entradas q se ofres§iese, mas fue q les prometio cortes, q 
En aviendo coyuntura los dexaria bolver A su ysla de Cuba 
y no por esto DExaron de murmurar del y de su conquista 
q tan caro les avia costado En dexar sus casas y rreposo y 
averse venido a meter a donde avn no estavan seguros de 
las vidas, y mas dezian q si En otra guerra Entrasemos con 
el poder de mexico q no se podria Escusar tarde o temprano 
de tenella, que creyan E tenian por §ierto q no nos podria- 
mos sustentar contra ellos En las batallas, segund avian vis- 
to lo de mexico y puentes y En la nonbrada de otunba, 
y mas dezian, q nro cortes por mandar y sienpre ser sefior y 
nosotros los q con el pasamos no teniamos que perder sino 
nras personas, asistiamos Con el, y dezian otros muchos des- 
atinos y todos se les desimulavan por el tienpo En q lo 
dezian, mas no tardo muchos meses q no les dio li§enyia pa- 
ra q se bolviesen a sus casas E ysla de Cuba lo qual dire En 
su tienpo y sazon y dexemoslo de rrepetir E digamos de lo 
q dize El coronista gomara questoy muy Arto de declarar 
sus borrones q dize q le ynformaron las quales no son asi 
como El lo escrive y por no me detener En todos los capitu- 
los a tornalles a rregitar y traer a la memoria, como y de q 
man era paso, lo E dexado de Escribir y agora pares§iendo- 
me q En esto deste rrequirimiento q Escrive q hizieron A 
cortes no dize quien fueron los q lo hizieron si Eran de los 
nros o de los de narvaez y En esto quescrive es por sublimar 
A cortes y abatir a nosotros los q con el pasamos y sepan q 
Emos tenido por §ierto los conquistadores vdaderos qsto ve- 



446 

mos escrito q le devieron de dar oro Al gomara e otras dadi- 
vas porq lo escriviese desta manera porq En todas las bata- 
llas o rreEncuentros Eramos los q sosteniamos Al cortes y 
Agora nos anichila En lo que dize este coronista, tanbien di- 
ze q dezia cortes En las rrespuestas del mismo rrequirimien- 
to q para Esfor§arnos y animarnos q Enbiaria A Uamar a 
Juan Velazquez de leon y a diego de ordas, q El vno de ellos 
dixo estava poblado en panuco con treszientos soldados y El 
otro En lo de guagaqualco con otros tantos soldados, y no es 
ansi En todo lo q dize porq luego q fuymos sobre mx*^ al 
socorro de p° de albarado §esaron los con§iertos questavan 
hechos ql Juan velazqz de leon avia de yr a lo de panuco y 
el diego de ordas a lo de gua^aqualco segund mas largamen- 
te lo tengo Escrito En el capitulo pasado q sobrello tengo 
hecho rrela9ion porquestos dos capitanes fueron a mexico 
Con nosotros al socorro del pedro de alvarado y en aqlla de- 
rrota el Juan velazquez de leon qdo muerto En las puentes 
y el diego de ordas salio muy mal herido de tres heridas q 
le dieron En mexico segund ya lo tengo escrito como y quan- 
do y de q arte paso por manera ql coronista gomara si como 
tiene buena rretorica En lo quescrive A§ertara a dizir lo q 
paso, muy bien fuera tanbien estado mirando quando dize 
En lo de la batalla de otunba q dize q si no fuera por la perso- 
na de cortes q todos fueramos ven§idos y quel solo fue El q 
la ven9io En el dar como dio el Encuentro al que traya El 
estandarte y sena de mex*^ ya E dho y lo torno agora a de- 
zir q a cortes toda la honrra se le deve como esforzado capi- 
tan, mas sobre todo Emos de dar gra§ias A dios que fue ser- 
vido poner su divina misericordia con q sienpre nos ayudava 
y sustentaba y cortes en tener tan esfor§ados y valerosos ca- 
pitanes y esforgados soldados como tenia, y nosotros le dava- 
mos esfuerzo y rronpiamos los esquadrones y le sustentava- 
mos para q con nra Ayuda y de nros capitanes, guerrease de 
la manera q guerreamos, como En los Capitulos pasados so- 
brellos dho tengo, porque sienpre andavan Juntos con cortes 
todos los capitanes por mi nonbrados y avn agora los torno 
a nonbrar q fueron xpoual deoli gon§alo de sandoval, fran^ 



• 447 

de morla y luys marin e fran^ de lugo y gongalo dominguez 
y otros muy buenos y valientes soldados q no alcanQavamos 
cavallos porq En aql tienpo diez e seis cavallos y yeguas fue- 
ron los q pasaron desde la ysla de Cuba con cortes e no los 
abia y avnq comengo av'" y como el gomara dize En su ysto- 
ria q solo la persona de cortes fue El q vengio la de otunba 
por q no declaro los Eroycos hechos qstos nros capitanes y 
valerosos soldados hizimos En esta batalla ansi q por estas 
cavsas tenemos por 5ierto q por Ensal§ar A solo cortes le 
devieran de vntar las manos porq de nosotros no haze min- 
§ion si no preguntenselo a aquel muy esforgado soldado q se 
dezia xpoual de olea, quantas vezes se hallo En ayudar a sal- 
var la bida a cortes hasta q En las puentes quando bolvimos 
sobre mex~ perdio la vida El E otros muchos soldados por 
le salvar. olvidado se me avia de otra vez q le salvo En lo 
de suchimylco q quedo mal herido e pa q bien se entienda 
esto q digo, vno fue xpoval de olea e otro xpoval de oly, tan- 
bien lo que dize El coronista del Encuentro con el cavallo 
que dio al capitan mexicano y le hizo abatir la vandera, An- 
si es verdad, mas ya E dho otra vez, q vn Juan de Salaman- 
ca, natural de la villa, de ontiveros y q despues de ganado 
mexico fue alcalde mayor de guagaqualco, Es El q le dio vna 
langada e le mato y quito El rrico penacho y estandarte q 
llebava y el se lo dio a Cortes y se lo dio su mag el tpo 
andando por Armas al salamanca y esto E traido Aqui A la 
memoria no por dexar de ensalgar y tenelle En mucha Es- 
tima A nro capitan hernando cortes y devesele todo onor y 
prez y honrra de todas .las batallas y vencimi^s hasta q ga- 
namos esta nueva espafia, como se suele dar En castilla A 
los muy nonbrados Capitanes y como los rromanos daban 
triunfos a ponpeyo y a Julio §esar, y a los §ipiones mas dino 
es de loor nro cortes q no los rromanos tanbien dize el mes- 
mo gomara q cortes mando matar secretam^ A xicotenga el 
mo§o En tascala por las traj^giones q andava congertando pa- 
ra nos matar como Atras E dho, no pasa ansi como dize, q 
donde le mando Ahorcar fue En vn pueblo junto a tezcuco 
como adelante dire, y tanbien dize este coronista, q yvan 



448 - 

tantos mill millares de yndios con nosotros a las Entradas q 
no tiene q^ ni rrazon En tantos como pone, y tanbien dize 
de las §ibdades y pueblos y poblazones q Eran tantos milla- 
res de casas no siendo la quinta parte, q si se suma todo lo 
que pone En su ystoria, son mas millones de onbres q En to- 
do El vniverso estan poblados y eso se le da poner ocho mill 
q ochenta mill y En esto se xatan9ia creyendo que ba muy 
Apa§ible su ystoria a los oyentes, no diziendo lo que pasa 
miren los curiosos letores quanto va de la vdad a la menti- 
ra ^ a esta mi rrelagion en dezir letra por letra lo Acaes§ido 
y no miren la rretorica y ornato q ya cosa vista es, qs mas 
apa§ible q no esta tan grosera mas resiste, la verdad a mi 
mala platica y pulidez de rretorica con q ba escrito: dexemos 
ya de contar, y traer a la memoria los borrones declarados y 
como yo soy mas obligado A dezir la verdad de todo lo q pa- 
sa q no a lisonxas, y demas de los qtos porq a escrito a dado 
ocasion ql dotor yllescas e pablo jobio sigan sus palabras, — 
bolvamos a nra ystoria y digamos como acordamos yr sobre 
tepeaca y lo q paso En la Entrada dire adelante 



CAPITULO CXXVIII [CXXX] Como fuy- 
mos a la provin^ia de tepeaca y lo que En 
ella hizimos y otras Cosas que pasaron — 




OMO Cortes avia demandado A los Ca§iques de tas- 
cala, ya por mi otras vezes Nonbrados, sinco mill 
honbres DE guerra para yr A correr y castigar los 
pueblos a donde abian muerto espanoles que era a tepeaca y 
cachula y tecamachalco qstaria de tascala seys o siete leguas 
de muy Entera voluntad tenian apareJados hasta quatro 

1 Testado en el original *'de 8U ystoria." 



449 

mill yndios, porq si mucha voluntad teniamos nosotros de 
yr Aquellos pueblos, mucha mas gana tenia El mase Escatzi 
E xicotenga El viejo de los dar, porq les avian venido a rro- 
bar, vnas estangias tenian boluntad de ebiar gente sobrellos 
y la causa es esta, porq como los mexicanos nos Echaron de 
mexico segund y de la manera que dho tengo En los capi- 
tulos pasados q sobrello hablan y supieron q En tascala nos 
aviamos rrecojido E tuvieron por gierto q estando sanos q 
avtamos de venir con el poder de tascala A correlles las trras 
de los pueblos q mas gercanos confinan con tascala y a este 
Efeto Enviaron a todas las provin§ias A donde sentian que 
aviamos de yr, muchos esquadrones mexicanos que Estu- 
viesen En guarda y guarniQiones y En tepeaca estaba la ma- 
yor guarnigion dellos, lo qual supo El mase Escatzi y el xi- 
cotenga, y avn se temian dellos, pues ya que todos estavamos 
A punto comen§amos a caminar E en aquella Jornada no 
Uevamos artilleria, ni escopetas porq todo quedo En las puen- 
tes E ya que algunas escaparon, no terniamos polvora y fuy- 
mos con diez y siete cavallos y seys vallestas E quatroyientos 
y veynte soldados los mas de espada y rrodela y con obra 
de ^ dos mill Amigos de tascala y el bastimento para vn dia 
porq las trras a donde y vamos Era muy pobladas y bien bas- 
te9idas de mayz e gallinas y perrillos de la trra y como lo 
teniamos de costunbre nros corredores del canpo adelante y 
con muy buen congierto fuymos A dormir obra de tres le- 
guas de tepeaca E ya tenian Algado todo El fardaje de las 
estangias y poblazon por donde pasavamos porq muy bien 
tubieron notigia, como yvamos A su pueblo E porque nin- 
guna cosa hiziesemos sino por buena orden y Justificada- 
mente, cortes les Enbio A dezir Con seys yndios de su pue- 
blo de tepeaca, q aviamos tomado En aquellas estangias que 
para Aquel Efeto los prendimos E con quatro sus mugeres, 
como ybamos A su pueblo A saber E ynquirir quien y quan- 
tos se hallaron En la muerte de mas de diez y seys espano- 
les que mataron sin causa ninguna viniendo de camino para 

1 Tachado en el original: '^seys quatro." 

Bemal Diaz del Castillo.— 58. 



450 

mexico, y tanbien venianios a saber a que causa tenian ago- 
ra nuevam^* muchos Esquadrones Mexicanos q con ellos 
avian ydo a rrobar y saltear vnas estan5ias de tascala nros 
amigos que les rruega que luego vengan de paz a donde es- 
tavamos para ser nros amigos y que despidan de su pueblo 
a los mexicanos si no, que yremos contra ellos como rrebel- 
des y matadores, y salteadores de caminos y les castigaria A 
fu^go y a sangre, y los daria por esclavos, y como fueron 
aquellos seys yndios y quatro mugeres del mismo pueblo si 
muy fieras palabras les Enbiamos a dezir, mucho mas bra- 
vosas nos dieron la rrespuesta con los mismos seys yndios y 
dos mexicanos q venian Con ellos, porq bien cono§ido tenian 
de nosotros q a ningunos mensageros q nos Enviaban ha§ia- 
mos demasia sino antes dalles algunas quentas por atraelles 
y con estos que Enbiaron los de tepeaca, fueron las palabras 
bravosas dhas por los capitanes mexicanos como ^tavan vi- 
toriosos de lo de las puentes de mx^ y Cortes les mando dar 
a cada mensagero vna manta y con ellos les torno A rreque- 
rir q viniesen a le ver y hablar q no oviesen miedo, E q pues 
ya los espanoles que Abian muerto no los podian dar vivos 
que vengan ellos de paz e se les perdonara los muertos q 
mataron y sobrello se les Escribio vna ca y avnq sabiamos 
que no la abian de Entender sino como vian papel de cas- 
tilla, tenian por gierto q Era cosa de mandami** E rrogo a los 
dos mexicanos que venian con los de tepeaca, con los men- 
saJes que bolviesen a £raer la rrespuesta y bolvieron y lo que 
dixeron Era q no pasasemos adelante E que nos bolviese- 
mos por donde veniamos si no q otro dia pensavan tener 
buenas artazgas con nros Cuerpos may ores q las de mexico 
y sus puentes E la de otunba y desque aquello vio Cortes 
comunicolo con nros capitanes y soldados y fue acordado que 
se hiziese vn avto por escrivano q diese fe de todo lo pasado 
E q se diesen por Esclavos a todos los aliados de mexico q 
oviesen muerto Espanoles porq habiendo dado la obidienyia 
a su mag, se levantaron y mataron sobre de ocho§ientos E 
sesenta de los nros e sesenta cavallos E a los deinas pueblos 
por salteadores de caminos E matadores' de honbres, hecho 



451 

Este avto, Envioseles A azer saber amonestandoles E rrequi- 
riendo con la paz, y'Ellos tornaron a dezir, q si luego no 
nos bolviamos que saldrian a nos matar y se apergibieron 
para Ello y nosotros lo mismo otro dia tuvimos en vn llano 
vna buena batalla con los mexicanos y tepeaquenos E como 
el canpo Era labrangas de mayz e magueyales puesto que pe- 
leavan bravosamente los mexicanos, presto fueron desvura- 
tados por los de cavallo y los q no los teniamos no Estava- 
mos despa§io, pues ver a nros amigos los de tascala tan 
animosos como peleavan con EUos y les siguieron el alcan- 
ze alii ovo muertos de los mexicanos y de tepeaca muchos, 
y de nros amigos los de tascala, tres, e hirieron dos cavallos, 
el vno se murio y tanbien hirieron dos de nros soldados, mas 
no de arte que peligre ninguno, pues seguidamente la vito- 
ria allegaronse muchas yndias E muchachos q se tornaron 
por los canpos y casas q honbres no curavamos de ellos, que 
los tascaltecas los llebavan por Esclavos, pues como los de 
tepeaca vieron que el bravear que hazian los mexicanos que 
tenian en su pueblo y guarnigion Eran desvaratados y ellos 
juntamente con ellos acordaron que sin degilles cosa nin- 
guna venir a donde estabamos y los rre§ibimos de paz y die- 
ron la obidiengia a su mag y Echaron los mexicanos de sus 
casas y nos fuymos al pueblo de tepeaca a donde se fundo 
vn^ villa q se nonbro la villa de segura de la frontera, por- 
que estaba en el camino de la villa rrica y En vna buena co- 
marca de buenos pueblos sujetos a mexico y abia mucho 
mayz y teniamos a guardar la rraya a nros Amigos los de 
tascala y alii se nonbraron alcaldes y rregidores y se dio or- 
den como se corriese los rrededores subjetos a mexico En es- 
pegial los pueblos A donde Abian muerto a espafioles y alii 
se hizo El hierro, con q se Abian de herrar los que se toma- 
ban por Esclavos q Era vna ^ que quiere de§ir guerra y des- 
de la villa de segura de la frontera corriamos los rrededores 
q fue cachula y tecamachalco E El pueblo de las guayavas 
y otros pueblos q no se me Acuerda el nonbre y En los de 
cachula fue adonde avian muerto En los aposentos quinze 
Espafioles y En este de cachula ovimos muchos Esclavos, de 



452 

manera q En obra de quarenta dias tuvimos aquellos pue- 
blos muy pa§ificos y castigados y En aqlla sazon avian al^a- 
do en mexico otro senor porque el sefior que nos Echo de 
mexico Era falles§ido de viruelas y al senor que hizieron Era 
vn sobrino o pariente muy §ercano de monte§uma q se dezia 
guatemuz, mangebo de hasta veynte e ginco alios bien gen- 
tilhonbre para ser yndio, y muy Esforgado y se hizo temer 
de tal manera q todos los suyos tenblaban del y Era casado 
con vna hija de montezuma bien hermosa muger pa ser yn- 
dia E Como este guatemuz senor de mexico supo Como Avia- 
mos desvaratado los Esquadrones mexicanos q Estavan en 
tepeaca y que avian dado la obidiengia a su mag y nos Ser- 
vian y dava de Comer y Estavamos AUi poblados y temio 
que les correriamos lo de guaxaca y otras provingias y a to- 
dos los Atraeriamos a nra Amistad, Envio sus mensageros 
por todos los pueblos para q estuviesen muy alerta con todos 
sus armas y a los caciques les daba Joyas de oro y a otros 
perdonaba los tributos y sobre todo mandava yr muy gran- 
des capitanias y guarnigiones de gente de guerra para q mi- 
rasen no nos Entrasemos En sus tierras y les Enviava a de- 
zir q peleasen muy rregiamente con nosotros no les acaesgiese 
como con lo de tepeaca E cachula e tecamachalco, q todos 
les aviamos hecho Esclavos y a donde mas gente de guerra 
Envio fue A guacachula e a ogucar que Esta de tepeaga a 
donde Estaba nra villa doze leguas, para q bien se Entien- 
dan los nonbres de estos pueblos vn nonbre es cachula, otro 
nonbre es guacachula, y dexare de contar lo que en guaca- 
chula se hizo hasta su tienpo y lugar y dire como En aquel 
ynstante vinieron de la villa rrica mensageros, como habia 
venido vn navio de cuba y §iertos soldados En el — 



458 



C APITULO CXXXI. como vino vn navio de 
Cuba que Enbiava diego velasquez E ve- 
nia En el por capitan pedro barba y la ma- 
nera quel almirante q puso nro cortes por 
guarda de la mar tenia para los prender^ 
y es desta manera. 

pues como andabamos En aquella provin§ia de tepeaca cas- 
tigando a los q fuero en la muerte de nros conpaiieros q fue- 
ron los q mataro en aqllos pueblos E atrayendolos de paz, y 
todos daban la obidien§ia A su magestad vinieron cartas de 
la villa rrica, como avia venido vn navio al puerto, E vino 
En el por capitan vn hidalgo q se dezia pedro barba muy 
amigo de cortes, y este pedro barva avia estado por teniente 
del diego velazqueaS En la Abana y traya treze soldados y vn 
cavallo y vna yegua, por quel navio que traya Era muy chi- 
co y traya cartas para panfilo de narvaez El capitan q diego 
velasquez avia Enbiado contra nosotros, creyendo qstaba por 
el la nueva espafia, En que le Enbiava a dezir el belasqz q 
si no avia muerto A cortes que luego se le Enbiase a cuba 
preso para Enbialle a castilla q ansi lo mandava don Juan 
rrodriguez de fonseca obispo de burgos e arzobispo de rroza- 
no presidente de yndias, que luego fuese preso con otros nros 
capitanes, porquel diego velasquez tenia por §ierto que Era- 
mos desbaratados o al de menos que narvaez senoreava la 
nueva espafia, pues como el pedro barva Uego al puerto con 
su navio y Echo Anclas luego le fue a visitar y dar El bien 
venido. El almirante de la mar que puso cortes el qual se 
dezia pedro cavallero o Juan cavallero por mi memorado 
qstaba por cortes con vn batel bien esquifado de marineros 
y armas Encubiertas e fue al navio del pedro barva y des- 
pues de hablar palabras de buen comedimiento, q tal viene 



454 

.V. m E quitar las gorras y abra§arse vnos a otros como se 
suele hazer preguntan al p^ esCudero por el seflor diego ve- 
lasquez, governador de cuba q tal qdava y rresponden el pe- 
dro barba q bueno, y el pedro barva y los demas q consigo 
trayan preguntan por el seiior capitan panfilo de narvaez y 
como le va con cortes y rresponden q muy bien E q cortes 
anda huyendo E alyado con veynte de sus conpaneros E que 
narvaez esta muy prospero E rrico, y que la tierra Es muy 
buena, y de platica En platica les dizen al pedro barva que 
alii Junto esta vn pueblo, que desEnbarque E que se vayan 
a dormir y estar En el, E que les traeran comida, E lo que 
oviere menester q para solo aquel efeto esta senalado Aquel 
pueblo, E tantas palabras les dizen q En el babel E en otros 
q luego alii venian de los otros navios qstaban surtos les sa- 
caron En tierra y desq los vieron fuera DEI navio ya tenya 
Copia DE marineros Juntos con el almirante pedro Caballe- 
ro, dixeron al pedro barva, sed preso por el senor capitan 
hernando Cortes mi senor y ansi los prendian y quedavan 
espantados y luego les sacavan del navio las velas y timon 
y agujas y las Enbiaban a donde Estabamos con cortes en 
tepeaca con los quales abiamos gran plazer Con el socorro q 
venia En el meJor tienpo que podia ser.porq En aquellas 
Entradas q E dho q haziamos, no Eran tan En salvo q A 
muchos de nros soldados no qdabamos heridos y otros ado- 
legian del trabajo porq de sangre y polvo questaba quaxado 
En las Entrafias no Echavaraos otra cosa del cuerpo por la 
boca, como trayamos sienpre las armas A cuestas y no parar 
noches ni dias, por manera que ya se avian muerto ginco de 
nros soldados de dolor de Costado en obra de quinze dias 
tanbien quiero dezir que con este pedro barva vino vn fran- 
5isco lopez vezino y rregidor q fue de guatimala y cortes ha- 
zia mueha honrra al pedro barva y le hizo capitan de ba- 
llesteros el qual dio nuevas que estaba otro navio chico En 
cuba que le queria Enbiar El diego velasquez con cagabi y 
bastimentos, El qual vino dende a ocho dias y venia En el 
por capitan vn hidalgo natural de medina del canpo q se 
dezia rrodrigo moreJon de lobera y traya consigo ocho sol- 



j 



455 

dados y seys vallestas y mucho hilo para cuerdas E una ye- 
gua, E ni mas ni menos q avian prendido al p" barba Ansi 
hizieron A este rrodrigo moreJon y luego fueron A segura 
de la frontera y con todos Ellos nos alegramos y cortes les 
hazia mucha honrra y les dava cargos y gragias A dios ya 
nos yvamos fortales^iendo Con soldados y vallestas y dos o 
tres cavallos mas y dexallo E A qui y bolvere A dezir lo que 
En guacaehula, hazian los Exergitos mexicanos q Estavan 
En frontera y como los cagiques de aquel pueblo vinieron 
aecretamente A demandar fabor A cortes pa echallos de ally 



CAPITULO CXXXIL Como los yndios de 
guacaehula vinieron a demandar fabor A 
cortes sobre que los Exercitos mexicanos 
los tratavan mal y los rrobavan y lo q so- 
brello se hizo — 

ya E dho que guatemuz senor que nuevamente Era Al9ado 
por rrey de mex*^ Enbiava guarniyiones a sus fronteras, En 
especial Enbio vna muy poderosa y de mucha copia de gue- 
rreros A guacaehula y otra A 09ucar questava dos o tres le- 
guas de Guacaehula porque bien temio que por alii le avia- 
mos de correlle las trras y pueblos subjetos a mx*^ y paresge 
ser q como Enbio tanta multitud de guerreros y como te- 
nian nuevo senor, hazian muchos rrobos y fuergas En los na- 
turales de aquellos pueblos Adonde Estavan aposentados y 
tantas q no les podian §ufrir los naturales de aqlla provin9ia 
porq dezian q les rrobaban las mantas y mayz E gallinas y 
Joy as de oro y sobre todo las hijas y niujeres si Eran her- 
mosas y que las for§avan del ante de sus maridos y padres y 
parientes y como oyeron dezir que los del pueblo de cholu- 
la estavan muy de paz y 80§iego despues q mexicanos no En- 
travan En el E agora ansi mysmo En lo de tepeaca y teca- 



i; 



456 

machalco E cachula A esta cavsa vinieron quatro prin9ipales 
muy secretamente de aquel pueblo por mi memorado, E di- 
zen A cortes q Enbie tevles E cavallos a quitar Aquellos rro- 
bos E agrabios q les aze los mexicanos E que todos los de 
aquel pueblo y otros Comarcanos ayudaran para q matemos 
A los Esquadrones mexicanos y desq cortes lo oyo luego pro- 
puso q fuese por capitan xpoual de oli con todos los mas de 
cavallo y vallesteros y con gran copia de tascaltecas porq con 
la ganangia que los de tascala abian llevado de tepeaca avian 
venido a nro rreal E villa muchos mas tascaltecas y nonbro 
Cortes para yr con el xpoual de oli A §iertos capitanes de 
los q avian venido con narvaez por manera q Uevaba sobre 
trezientos soldados y todos los meJores cavallos q teniamos 
E yendo que yban con todos sus conpafleros camino de aque- 
11a provin§ia paresgio ser q En el Camino dixeron §iertos yn- 
dios a los de narvaez como estavan todos los canpos y casas 
llenas de gente de guerra de mexicanos, mucha mas que la 
de otunba, E questava alii con ellos El Guatemuz senor de 
mx^ E tantas cosas diz que les dixeron q atemorizaron a los 
de narvaez, y como no tenian buena voluntad de yr a En- 
tradas ni ver guerras sino bolverse A su ysla de Cuba y co- 
mo avian escapado de la de mx~ y cal9adas y puentes, y la 
de otunba, no se querian ver En otra como lo pasado y so- 
brello dixeron los de narvaez tantas cosas al xpoual de oli q 
no pasase mas adelante sino q se bolviese E q mirase no fue- 
se peor Esta guerra q las pasadas donde perdiesen las vidas 
y tantos ynconvenientes les dixeron y davanle A Entender 
q si el xpoual de oli qria yr, q fuese En buena ora, q muchos 
dellos no querian pasar Adelante por manera, q por muy Es- 
for§ado q Era El capitan q llevava avnquel les dezia q no 
Era cosa bolver sino yr Adelante, que buenos Cavallos lle- 
vava y mucha gente y que si bolviesen vn paso atras, q los 
yndios los ternian En poco E que En trra liana Era, y q no 
qria bolver sino yr adelante y para ello muchos de nros solda- 
dos, de cortes le ayudavan A dezir q no se bolviesen y q En 
otras Entradas E guerras peligrosas se avian visto E que gra- 
§ias A dios En todas avian tenido vitoria y no Aprovecho 



457 

cosa ninguna con quanto les dezian sino por via de rruegos 
le trastornaron su seso q bolviesen y que desde Cachula Es- 
cribiesen A cortes sobre El caso, e ansi se boluio y desq cor- 
tes lo supo ovo mucho enqjo y Enbio al xpoual de oli otros 
dos vallesteros y le Escrivio q se maravillava de su buen es- 
fuer^o y valentia, q por palabras de ninguno dexase de yr A 
vna cosa sejaalada como aquella y desq El xpoual de oli vio 
la carta hazia bravuras de Enojo y dixo a los q tal le acon- 
seJaron q por su cavsa avia caydo e falta y luego sin mas 
determinagion les mado fuesen con el E que El que no qui- 
siese yr q se bolviese al rreal para cobarde q cortes le casti- 
garia y como yba hecho vn bravo leon de Enojo va con su 
gente camino de guacachula y antes q llegasen con vna le- 
gua les salen a dezir los Cagiques de aql pueblo de la *ma- 
nera y arte questavan los de Culua y como avia de dar En 
ellos y de q manera Avia de ser ayudado y desq lo ovieron 
Entendido Aper§ibio a los de cavallo, vallesteros y soldados 
E segund y de la manera q tenian El congierto da En los de 
Culua E puesto q pelearon muy bien por vn buen rrato y le 
hirieron Qiertos soldados y le mataron dos cavallos E hirie- 
ron otros ocho En vnas fuer^as E alvarradas questavan En 
aquel pueblo En obra de vna ora Estavan ya puestos En huy- 
da todos los mexicanos y diz que nros tascaltecas q lo hizie- 
ron muy varonilmente que matavan y prendian muchos de 
ellos y como les Ayudaban todos los de aquel pueblo y pro- 
vingia hizieron gran Estrago en los mexicanos que presto 
despacharon En se yr rretrayendo para se hazer fuertes En 
otro gran pueblo q se dize ogucar donde Estavan otras gran- 
des guarni§iones de mexicanos y estavan En gran fortaleza 
y quebraron vna puente porq no pudiesen pasar cavallos ni 
El xpoual de oli, porq como E dho andava enojado, hecho 
vn tigre, no tardo mucho En aquel pueblo que luego fue A 
ogucar con los que le pudieron seguir y con los amigos de 
guacachula paso El rrio y da En los Esquadrones mexica- 
nos que de presto los ven§io y alii le mataron dos cavallos y 
a el le dieron dos heridas y la vna En el muslo y el cava- 
llo bien herido y Estuvo En ogucar dos dias y como los me- 

Bemal Diaz del Ca0tUlo.-^9. 



458 

xicanos fueron desbaratados, luego vinieron los Caciques y 
sefiores de aquel pueblo y de- otros comarcanos a demandar 
paz, y se dieron por vasallos de nro rrey y sefior, y desque 
todo fue pa§ifico, se fue con todos sus soldados a nra villa de 
la frontera y porq yo no fuy En esta Entrada, digo En esta 
rrelayion, diz qiie paso lo q E dicho, y cortes le salio a rres- 
§ebir y todos nosotros* E ovimos mucho plazer y rreyamos 
de como le avian conbocado A que se bolviese y el xpoual 
de oli tanbien rreya y dezia que mas cuydado tenian Al- 
gunos de sus minas y de cuba, q no de las armas E que Ju- 
rava A dios que no le Acaesziese llebar consigo si otra En- 
trada yba, sino de los pobres soldados de los de cortes y no 
de los rricos que benyan de narvaez, q querian mandar mas 
q no el. dexemos de platicar mas desto y digamos como El 
coronista gomara dize En su ystoria, que por no Entender 
bien El xpoual de oly A los nahuatatos E ynterpretes se bol- 
via del camino de guacachula creyendo q Era trato doble 
contra nosotros y no fue ansi como dize, sino q los mas prin- 
§ipales Capitanes de los de narvaez como les dezian otros yn- 
dios questavan Juntos grandes Esquadrones de mexicanos y 
mas q En lo de mexico E otunba y q con ellos estava El se- 
fior de mexico q se dezia guatemuz q Entonyes le abian al- 
§ado por rrey y como abian escapado de la de magagatos, 
como dize El rrefran, tuvieron gran temor de Entrar En 
aquellas batallas y por esta cavsa convocaron al xpoual de 
oli q se bolviese, y avnquel todavia porfiava de yr adelante 
y esta Es la verdad e no mentiras y tanbien dize que fue Cor- 
tes Aquella guerra, desque El xpoual de oli se bolvia, no fue 
ansi quel mismo xpoual de oly, maestre de canpo Es el que 
fue Como dho tengo, tanbien dize dos vezes q los que yn- 
formaron a los de narvaez Como estavan los muchos milla- 
res de yndios Juntos, que fueron los de guaxo§ingo, quando 
pasaban por aquel pueblo, tanbien dize otras cosas q no son 
ansi porq claro esta q para yr desde tepeaca a guacachula, 
no avian de bolver atras por guaxo§ingo, que Era yr, como 
si estuviesemos Agora En medina del canpo y para yr a sa- 
lamanca tomar El camino por valladolid, no es mas lo vno 



459 

En conparagion de lo otro ansi que muy desatinado anda El 
coronista, y si todo lo q Escrive de otras coronicas despana, 
es desta manera, yo las maldigo como cosa de patranas y 
mentiras, puesto que por mas lindo estilo lo diga, y dexemos 
ya esta materia y digamos lo que mas En Aql ystante acon- 
tes§io E fue que vino vn navio al puerto del pefiol del non- 
bre feo que se dezia El tal de bernal Junto a la villa rrica, 
q venia de lo de panuco que Era de los q Enbiaba garay y 
venia En el por capitan vno q se dezia camargo y lo que pa- 
so dire adelante. 



CAPITULO CXXXIIL Como aporto al pe- 
fiol y puerto questa Junto a la billa rrica 
vn navio de los de fran^ de garay q avia 
Enbiado a poblar El rrio de panuco, y lo 
que sobrello mas paso — 




iSTANDO que estavamos En segura de la frontera de 
la manera q En mi rrelacion abran oydo, vinieron 
Cartas a cortes como avia Aportado vn navio de 
los quel frangisco de garay abia ebiado a poblar a panuco E 
q venia por capitan vno que se dezia hulano camargo y tra- 
ya sobre sesenta soldados y todos dolientes y muy amarillos 
E hinchadas las barrigas E que avian dho q otro capitan 
quel garay abia Enbiado a poblar a panuco q se dezia hula- 
no albarez pinedo q los yndios de panuco los abian muerto 
y a todos los soldados y caballos, q abia enbiado aquella pro- 
vin9ia, y que los navios se los abian quemado, y queste Ca- 
margo viendo El mal subyeso, se enbarco con los soldados q 
dho ten go y se bino a socorrer aquel puerto porq bien tenian 



460 

notigia questavamos poblados ally y que a cavsa q por sus- 
tentar las guerras con los yndios de xamayca no tenian q 
comer E venian tan flacos y amarillos E hinchados, y mas 
dixeron que el Capitan camargo avia sido frayle dominico, e 
q abia hecho profision los quales soldados con su capitan se 
fueron luego poco a poco porq no podian andar a pie de fla- 
cos a la villa de la frontera donde estavamos y quando cor- 
tes los vio tan hinchados y amarillos y q no Eran para pelear, 
harto teniamos q curar En ellos yles hizomuchahonrray ten- 
go q el camargo murio luego q no me Acuerdo bien q se hizo e 
tanbien se murieron muchos de ellos y Entonges por burlar 
les llamamos y pusimos por nonbre los pansiverdetes, porq 
trayan los colores de muertos y las barrigas muy ynchadas y 
por no me detener En contar cada cosa En q tienpo y lugar 
Acontesgian, pues Eran todos los navios q En aqjiel tienpo 
venian a la villa rrica del garay, puesto q vinieron los vnos 
de los otros vn mes delanteros hagamos quenta que todos 
Aportaron aquel puerto, Agora sea vn mes antes los vnos 
que los otros y esto digo q vino luego vn miguel diaz de avz 
Aragones, por capitan de frangisco de garay, El cual le En- 
biava para socorro Al capitan hulano albarez pinedo, q Creya 
que estaba En panuco y como llego de puerto de panuco y 
no hallo rastro, ni hueso, ni pelo de la armada de Garay, 
luego entendio por lo q bio que abian muerto porque al mi- 
guel diaz le dieron guerra los yndios de aqlla provingia y a es- 
ta cavsa luego que llego con su navio se vino aquel nro puer- 
to y desEnbarco sus soldados q Eran mas de §inquenta e 
treinta y siete cavallos y se fue luego para donde Estabamos 
con cortes y este fue El mejor socorro y al mejor tienpo que 
le abiamos menester y para q bien sepan quien fue Este mi- 
guel diaz de avz, digo yo q sirvio muy bien a su mag En to- 
do lo q se ofres§io En las guerras E conquistas de la nueva 
espafia y este fue El q truxo pleyto despues de poblada la 
nueva espafia con vn cufiado de cortes q se dezia andres de 
barrios natural de sevilla q llamavan El dansador e pusose- 
le aql nonbre porq baylava mucho, sobre El pleyto de la mi- 
tad de mestitan, E este miguel Diaz de avz, fue El que en 



461 

El rreal consejo de yndias En el afiio de mill E qui^s y qua- 
renta y vno, dixo q a vnos daba favor e yndios por bien bay- 
lar e danyar y a otros les quitava sus haciendas porq avian 
bien servido a su mag peleando; aqueste Es El q dixo que por 
ser Cuiiado DE cortes, le dio los yndios q no meres§ia estando 
CO.... en eebilla.... y los dexaba de dar a quien su mag manda- 
ba aquestfe Es El q claramente dixo otras cosas agerca de q no 
azian justy9ia a los que su mag mada e mas dixo otras cosas 
q qrian rremedar al villano de la Cuba, de q se yvan Eno- 
jando los sefiores q mandaban En el rreal consejo de yndias 
q Era presidente el rrvsimo fray gar^jia de loysa arzobispo q 
fue de sevilla E oydores El obispo de lugo E el licen§iado gu- 
tierre velasquez y el dotor don bernal Diaz de luco y el dotor 
beltran. bolvamos a nro cuento, y entonges El miguel diaz de 
avz desq ovo ablado'lo q quiso, tendio la capa En el suelo, y 
puso la daga sobre El pecho Estando tendido En ella de espal- 
das E dixo sy no es verdad lo q digo, vra al* me mande de- 
gollar con esta daga, e si es vdad azer rreta just* Entonges el 
presidente le mando levantar y dixo q no estavan alii para 
matar a ninguno sino pa hazer Justizia, E que fue mal mi- 
rado En lo q dixo, E que se salyese fuera y q no dixese mas 
desacatos si no q le castigaria y lo q proveyeron sobre su pley- 
to de mestitan q le den la parte de lo q rrentare q son mas 
de dos mill y quinientos pesos de su parte con tal q no Entre 
en el pueblo por dos afios, porq En lo q le acusavan Era q 
avia muerto giertos yndios En aquel pueblo y en otros q avia 
tenido. dexemos de contar esto, pues va fuera de nra rrela- 
gion y digamos q desde alii a pocos dias que miguel diaz de 
avz avia venido aquel puerto de la manera q dho tengo, 
aporto luego otro navio q Enbiava El mismo garay En Ayu- 
da y socorro de su armada, creyendo q todos Estavan bue- 
nos y sanos En el rrio de panuco y benia En el por capitan 
vn viejo que se dezia rramirez E ya Era honbre angiano y 
A Esta cavsa le llamavamos rramirez el viejo porq Avia en 
nro rreal dos rramirez y traya sobre quarenta soldados y diez 
cavallos E yeguas e vallesteros y otras armas y el frangisco 
de garay no hazia sino echar vn virote tras otro en socorro 



462 

de su armada y En todo le socorria la buena fortuna A cor- 
tes y a nosotros, Era gran ayuda y todos Esos de garay q 
dho tengo fueron a tepeaca A donde Estavamos y porq los 
soldados q traya miguel diaz de avz venian muy rrezios y 
gordos les pusimos por nonbre, los de los lomos rrezios y a 
los q traya el viejo rramirez q tray an vnas armas de algo- 
don de tanto gordor que no las pasava ninguna flecha, y pe- 
savan mucho, pusimosles por nonbre los de las albardillas 
y quando fueron los capitanes q dho tengo y soldados de- 
lante de cortes, les hizo mucha honrra. dexemos de contar 
de los socorros que teniamos de garay, que fueron buenos, y 
digamos como cortes Envio a gon§alo de sandoval A vna 
Entrada A vnos pueblos q se dizen xalazingo y gacatami. 



CAPITULO CXXXIIII. Como Enbio cortes 
a goiKjalo de sandoval a pacjificar los pue- 
blos de xalazingo E ^acatami, y llevo do- 
zientos soldados y veynte de cavallo y 
doze vallesteros y para q supiese q Espa- 
noles mataron En ellos y q mirase q armas 
les avian tornado y q tierra Kra y les de- 
mandase El oro q rrobaron. 




OMO ya cortes tenia copia de soldados y cavallos y 
vallestas E se yba fortales§iendo con los dos na- 
viachuelos q Enbio diego Velasquez en que ve- 
nian por capitanes p° Barba y rr° de MoreJon de lobera y 
truxeron en ellos sobre veynte E §inco soldados y dos cava- 
llos y vna yegua y luego binieron los tres navios de garay q 



463 

file El primero capitan que vino camargo, y El seguiulo mi- 
guel diaz de Av/ y El postrero rramirez El viejo y trayan 
Entre todos Estos capitanes que E nonbrado sobre giento y 
veynte soldados y diez y siete cavallos E yeguas y las yeguas 
Eran de Juego y de carrera y cortes tuvo noti§ia que en vnos 
pueblos q se dizen §acatami y xalagingo E en otros sus co- 
marcanos q avian muerto machos soldados de los de nar- 
vaez q venian camino de mexico E ansi mesmo q En aque- 
llos pueblos avian muerto y rrovado El oro a vn Juan de 
alcantara y a otros dos veginos de la villa rrica q Era lo q 
les avia cabido de las partes A todos los vezinos q quedavan 
En la misma villa segund mas largo lo escrito En el capitu- 
lo q dello se trata, y envio cortes para hazer aqlla Entrada 
por capitan a gon§alo de sandoval q era alguagil mayor, y 
muy Esforgado y de buenos consejos y llevo consigo dozien- 
tos soldados y todos los mas de los nros de cortes y veynte 
de cavallo E doze vallesteros y buena copia de tascaltecas y 
Antes q llegase aquellos pueblos supo que estavan todos pues- 
tos En Armas E juntamente tenian consigo guarnigiones de 
mexicanos E q se avian muy bien fortalegido con albarradas 
y petrechos porque bien avian Entendido q por la muerte 
de los espafioles que avian muerto q luego aviamos de ser 
contra ellos, para los castigar, como a los tepeaca y cachula 
y tecamachalco E sandoval ordeno muy bien sus Esquadro- 
nes y vallesteros, y mando a los de cavallo como y de que 
manera avian de yr y rronper y primero que entrasen En su 
tierra les Enbio mensageros a dezilles q viniesen de paz y q 
diesen El oro E armas q oviesen rrovado E que la muerte 
de los espafioles se les perdonaria E esto de les enbiar men- 
sageros sobre la paz, fueron tres o quatro vezes y la rrespues- 
ta q Enbiavan Era q como avian muerto E comido los tev- 
les, q les demandan, q ansi aria al Capitan, y a todos los que 
llevaba; por manera q no aprovechavan mensages, y otra vez 
les torno A Enviar a dezir q les haria Esclavos por traydo- 
res y salteadores de caminos y q se aparejasen a defender E 
fue sandoval Con sus conpafieros y les Entra por dos partes 
q puesto q peleavan muy bien los mexicanos y los naturales 



464 

de aquellos pueblos, sin mas rrelatar lo q alii En aquellas 
vatallas pasaron los desbarato y fueron huyendo los mexi- 
canos y ca§iques de aquellos pueblos y siguio El alcange y 
prendio mucha: gente menuda q de los yndios no se curavan 
del los, por no tener q guardar y hallaron En vnos Cues de 
aquel pueblo muchos vestidos y armas y frenos de cavallos 
y dos sillas y otras cosas de la gineta que avian presentado 
a sus ydolos acordo sandoval estar alii tres dias y vinieron 
los Ca^iiqs de aqllos pueblos A demandar perdon y a dar la 
obidiwi§ia a su magestad y sandoval les dixo, q diesen El 
oro q abian rrobado a los espaiioles q mataron E que luego 
les perdonaria y rrespondieron ql oro q los mexicanos lo 
ovieron y q lo Enbiaron al seiior de mexico q Enton§es avian 
Al^ado por rrey, y que no tenian ninguno, por manera q les 
mando, q En quanto El perdon que fuesen a donde estava 
malinche, q es cortes, E quel les hablaria E perdonaria y 
ansi se bolvio con buena presa de mugeres e muchachos que 
les hecharon El hierro por esclavos y cortes holgo mucho 
desq le vio venir bueno y sano puesto q traya ocho soldados 
mal heridos y tres cavallos muertos y avn el sandoval traya 
vn flechazo, yo no fuy En esta Entrada qstava muy malo de 
calenturas, y Echava sangre por la boca e gragias A Dios es- 
tuve bueno porq me sangraron como gonzalo de sandoval 
abia dho a los Cagiques de xalazingo E gacatami q viniesen 
a cortes A demandar pazes, no sol amen te vinieron Aqllos 
pueblos solos, sino tanbien otros muchos de la comarca, y 
todos dieron la obidiengia A su mag y trayan de Comer A 
aqlla villa donde estabamos e fue aquella Entrada q hizo De 
mucho provecho y se pagifico la trra y dende En adelante 
tenia Cortes tanta fama En todos los pueblos de la nueva 
Espana, lo vno de muy Justificado, En lo que hazia, y lo 
otro de muy Esforzado que a todos ponia temor E muy ma- 
yor a guatemuz El senor E rrey nuevamente al§ado por rrey 
En mexico y tanta Era la avtoridad y ser y mando q avia Co- 
brado Cortes que venian antel pleytos de yndios de lexos 
tierras En espegial sobre cosas de ca§icazgos y senorios Como 
En aquel tienpo anduvo la virhuela tan comund En la nue- 



465 

va espana falle§ian muchos Cagiqs y sobre a quien pertenes- 
5ia El ca§icazgo y ser seiior y partir trras o vasallos o bienes, 
venian a cortes como a sefior asoluto de toda la trra para q 
por su mano E avtoridad Al§ase por sefior a quien le perte- 
nes§ia, y En aquel tienpo vinieron del pueblo de ogucar y 
guacachula otras vezes por mi memorados porq En ogucar 
estava casada vna parienta muy gercana de montezuma con 
el sefior de aquel pueblo y tenian vn hiJo q dezian Era so- 
brino E cagique del monteguma E segund paresge Eredaba 
El senorio E otros dezian q les pertenesgian a otros sefior y 
sobrello tenian diferengias y vinieron a cortes y mando q lo 
Eredase El. pariente de montezuma y luego cunplieron su 
mandado E ansi vinieron de otros muchos pueblos de la rre- 
donda sobre pleytos y a cada vno mandava dar sus tierras y 
vasallos segund sentia por derecho q les pertenesgia, y En 
aqlla sazon tanbien tuvo notigia cortes, q En vn pueblo qs- 
taba de alii seys leguas q se dezia Cogotlan y le pusimos por 
nonbre castil bianco avian muerto nueve Espafioles Enbio 
al mismo gongalo de sandoval para q los Castigase y los tru- 
xese de paz y fue Alia con treynta de Caballo y §ient solda- 
dos E ocho vallesteros y ginco escopeteros E muchos tascal- 
tecas y despues de hechos sus rrequirimientos y protestagiones 
q vengan de paz y se les perdonara la muerte de los espafio- 
les q mataron y les Enbiaron a dezir otras muchas cosas de 
cunplimiento con ginco yndios pringipales de tepeaca y q si 
no venian q les daria guerra y haria Esclavos y paregio ser 
estavan En aql pueblo otros esquadrones mexicanos En su 
guarda y anparo y rrespondieron q sefior teuian q Era gua- 
temuz E q no avian menester venir ni yr a llamado de otro 
sefior q si alia fuesen q En el canpo les hallarian, q no se 
les abia fallesgido las fuergas, agora menos q las tenian en 
mexico y puentes E calgadas E q ya sabian a que tanto alle- 
gavan nras valentias, y desq aqllo, oyo sandoval, puesto muy 
En orden su gente como abia de pelear y los de cavallo y 
escopeteros y ballesteros, y mando a los tascaltecas que no 
se metiesen En los Enemigos al pringipio, porq no estorva- 
sen los cavallos, y porq no corriesen peligro o hiriesen algu- 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo.— 60. 



46G 

DOS dellos con las vallestas y escopetas o los tropellasen c6 
los cavallos hasta aver rronpido los esquadrones y despues 
de desbaratados, que prendiesen a los mexicanos y siguiesen 
El alcan^e y luego comengo de caminar hazia El pueblo y 
salenle al camino y Encuentro dos buenos esquadrones de 
gerreros junto a vnas fuer^as y barrancas y alii estuvieron 
fuertes vn rato, y con las ballestas y escopetas les hazian mu- 
cho mal, por manera q tuvo sandoval lugar de pasar aquella 
fuerga, E albarradas con los de cavallo, y aunq le hirieron 
nueve cavallos, y vno murio, y tanbien le hirieron cuatro 
soldados, y como se vio fuera de aquel mal paso E tuvo lu- 
gar por donde Corriesen los cavallos, y avnque no Era buena 
trra ni llano que avia muchas piedras, da tras los Esqua- 
drones rronpiendo por ellos q los llevo hasta El mismo pue- 
blo a donde Estaba vn gran patio y alii tenian otra fuer§a y 
vnos Cues a donde se tornaron a ser fuertes y puesto que pe- 
leaban muy bravosamente todavia los venjio y mato hasta 
siete yndios porqstavan En malos pasos, y los tascaltecas no 
avian menester mandalles q siguiesen El alcanye q con la 
ganan§ia como Eran guerreros Ellos tenian El cargo Espe- 
§ialmente como sus tierras no estavan lejos de aquel pueblo 
alii se obieron muchas mugeres y gente menuda y estuvo alii 
El gon§alo de sandoval. dos dias y Enbio a Uamar los Ca- 
ciques de aquel pueblo con vnos prin§ipales de tepeaca q 
yvan En su conpafiia E vinieron e demandaron perdon de 
la muerte de los espaiioles, y sandoval les dixo, q si davan 
las rropas y haziendas q rrobaron de los q mataron, q si per- 
donaria y rrespondieron q todo lo avian qmado y q no te- 
nian ninguna cosa, y q los q mataron q los mas dellos avian 
ya comido y q ginco tevles Enbiaron bivos a guatemuz su 
sefior y q ya avian pagado la pena Con los q agora les abian 
muerto En el canpo y En el pueblo, y q les perdonase E que 
llevarian muy bien de Comer y baste§erian la villa a donde 
Estava malinche, y como El gongalo de sandoval vio q no 
se podia hazer mas les perdono y alii se ofresgieron de ser- 
vir bien en lo q les mandasen y con este rrecado se fue a la 
villa y fue bien rresgebido de Cortes y de todos los del rreal. 



467 



donde lo dexare de hablar mas En ello y digamos como se 
herraron todos los esclavos q se jtvian avido En aqllos pue- 
blos y provinyia y lo que sobrello se hizo — 



CAPITULO CXXXV Como se rrecogieron 
todas las mugeres y Esclavas y Esclavos 
de todo nro rreal q aviamos abido En aque- 
llo de tepeaca y cachula y tecamachalco, 
y En castil bianco y en sus tierras — para 
se herrar con el yerro q hizieron En non- 
bre de su magestad y de lo q sobrello pa- 
so — 



jsy^ 




OMO gongalo de sandoval ovo llegado a la villa de 
segura de la frontera de hazer aqllas Entradas q 
ya E dho y En aquella provingia todos los tenia- 
mos ya pa§ificos y no teniamos por Ententes donde yr a En- 
trar porq todos los pueblos de los rrededores avian dado la 
obidiengia a su mag, Acordo cortes, con los ofigiales del rrey 
q se herrasen las piegas y esclavos q se avian avido para sacar 
su quinto despues q se oviese primero sacado el de su mag, 
y para ello mando dar pregones en el rreal E villa, q todos 
los soldados llevasemos a vna casa qstaba senalada para aql 
efeto a herrar toda& las pie9as q tuviesen recoxidas y dieron 
de plazo aquel dia y otro, q se pregoncf, y todos ocurrimos 
con todas las yndias y muchachas y muchachos q aviamos 
avido q honbres De Edad no curavamos dellos, q Eran ma- 
los de guardar y no aviamos menester su servigio, teniendo 
a nros amigos los tascaltecas, pues ya Juntas todas las piegas 



468 



y Echados El yerro q Era vna ^ como esta q queria dezir 
guerra, cuando no nos catamos Apartan El rreal quinto E lue- 
go sacan otro quinto para cortes, y demas desto, la noche an- 
tes quando metimos las pie§as Como E dho, En aquella casa 
abian ya Escondido y tornado las meJores yndias q no pa- 
re§io alii ninguna buena y al tienpo de rrepartir davannos 
las viejas y ruynes y sobre Esto ovo grandes murmura§io- 
nes contra Cortes y de los q mandaban hurtar y esconder las 
* buenas yndias y de tal manera se lo dixeron Al mesmo Cor- 
tes soldados de los de narvaez q Juraron a dios q no avia tal 
acaes§ido aver dos rreyes en la trra de nro rrey y senor, y 
sacar dos quintos, y vno de los soldados q se lo dixeron, fue 
vn Juan bono de qxo, y mas dixo q no Estarian en tierra se- 
mejante y q lo haria saber En castilla a su mag y a los se- 
nores de su rreal consejo de yndias, y tanbien dixo a cortes 
otro soldado muy claramente, q no basto rrepartir El oro q 
se avia avido En mx*^* de la manera q lo rrepartio, y que 
quando lo estava rrepartiendo dezia q Eran trezientos mill 
pesos los que se avian allegado y q quando salimos huyendo 
de mex^, mando tomar por testimonio q quedaban mas de 
sietygientos mill y que Agora El pobre soldado q abia he- 
chado los bofes y estaba lleno de heridas por aver vna bue- 
na yndia y les avian dado naguas y camisas, avian tornado 
y escondido las tales yndias, y q quando dieron El pregon 
para q se llevasen A herrar q creyeron que A cada soldado 
bolverian sus piegas, y q Apre§iarian q tantos pesos valian 
y q como las Apreciase pagasen El quinto a su magestad y 
q no abria mas quinto pa cortes y dezian otras murmura§io- 
. nes peores questas, y desq cortes aqllo vio con palabras algo 
' blandas dixo q Jurava En su congiengia, q aquesto tenia por 
' costunbre Jurar, q de alii adelante, q no se haria de aquella 
manera sino q buenas o malas yndias sacallas Al Almoneda 
y la buena q se venderia por tal y la q no lo fuese por me- 
nos pre^jio, y de aqlla manera no ternian q rrefiir con el y 
puesto q Alii En tepeaca no se hizieron mas esclavos mas 
despues En lo de tezcuco casi q fue desta manera, Como ade- 
lante dire y dexare de hablar En esta materia y digamos 



469 

, otra cosa caai peor questo de los esclavos y es q ya E dho En 
-. el capitulo [CXXVIII] quando la triste noche salimos liu- 
yendo de mexico Como qdaba En la sala donde posaba cortes 
muchas barras de oro perdido q no lo podian sacar, mas de 
lo q cargaron En la yegua e Caballos y muehos tascaltecas 
y lo q hurtaron los amigos y otros soldados q cargarian de- 
llo y como lo demas se qdaba perdido En poder de los me- 
xicanos, cortes dixo delante de vn escrivano del rrey, q qual- 
quiera q quisiese sacar oro de lo q alii qdaba q se lo lie vase 
mucho En buen ora por suyo como se avia de perder, y mu- 
ehos soldados de los de narvaez Cargaron dello y ansi mis- 
mo algunos de los nros y por sacallo perdieron muehos de- 
llos las vidas y los q escaparon Con la presa q trayan abian 
estado En gran rriesgo de morir y salieron llenos de heridas 
y como En nro rreal e villa de segura de la frontera q asi 
se llaraava alcan§o cortes A saber que avia muchas barras de 
oro, y q andavan en el juego y como dize El rrefran, quel 
oro y amores Eran malos de Encubrir, mando dar vn pregon 
so graves penas q trayan a manifestar El oro q sacaron y que 
. les daba la tergia parte dello y si no lo traen q se lo tomava 
• todo y muehos soldados de los q lo tenian no lo quisieron 
dar y algunos se lo tomo cortes, como prestado y mas por 
fuerga q por grado y como todos los mas Capitanes tenian 
oro y avn los ofigiales del rrey muy meJor se callo lo del 
pregon, q no se hablo En ello, mas pares^io muy mal esto 
q mando cortes dexemoslo ya de mas declarar y digamos co- 
mo todos los mas capitanes y personas prin§ipales de los q 
psaron con narvaez demandaron li§en§ia A cortes para se 
bolver A cuba y cortes se la dio, y lo q mas Acaesgio; 



470 



CAPITULO CXXXVI. Como demandaron 
liqeiiQia A cortes los capitanes y personas 
mas pringipales de los q narvaez abia tray- 
do En su conpania para se bolver a la ys- 
la de Cuba y cortes se la dio y se fueron y 
de como despacho cortes Enbajadores pa- 
ra castilla y para santo Domingo y xamay- 
ca y lo q sobre cada cosa Acaesgio. 

como vieron los Capitanes de narvaez, q ya teniamos sico- 
rros, ansi de los q vinieron de cuba, como los de xamayca q 
avia Enviado fran*^° de garay para su armada segund lo ten- 
go declarado en el Capitulo q dello habla, y vieron q los pue- 
blos de la prouin§ia de tepeaca, estaban pagificos despues de 
muchas palabras q A cortes dixeron, con grandes ofertas y 
rruegos, le suplicaron q les diese lie* para se bolver a la ys- 
la de cuba, pues se lo abia prometido y luego cortes se la dio 
y avn les prometio q si bolvia a ganar la nueva espaiia y 
^ibdad de mx^ q al andres de duero su conpanero, q le da- 
ria mucho mas oro q le abia de antes dado y ansi hizo ofer- 
tas a los demas capitanes En especial agustin bermudez y les 
mando dar matalotage q En aqlla sazon avia que Era mayz 
y perrillos salados y pocas gallinas y vn navio de los mejo- 
res y escribio cortes a su muger q se dezia dona catalina Jua- 
rez, la marcaida, y a Juan xuarez, su cufiado, q En aquella 
sazon bivia En la ysla de cuba y les ebio giertas barras y Jo- 
yas de oro y les hizo saber todos los desmanes y trabajos q 
nos abian acontesgido y como nos Echaron de mx*^ Dexe- 
mos esto y digamos las personas q demandaron ligengia pa- 
ra volver a cuba, que todavia yban ricos fueron andres de 
duero, y agustin bermudez, Ju^ bono de qxo y bernaldino 



471 

de qsada y fran~ belasquez El Corcobado pariente del diego 
Velasquez governador de cuba y Gongalo carrasco El q bi- 
ve En la puebla q despues se bolvio a esta nueva espafia y 
vn melchior de Velasco q fue vzo de guatimala, y vn Xime- 
nez q bive En guaxaca que fue por sus hijos y el comenda- 
dor leonel de §ervantes, q fue por sus hijas q despues de ga- 
nado mexico las caso muy honrradamente E se fue vno q se 
dezia maldonado natural de medellin qstaba doliente no di- 
go maldonado El q fue marido de dofia maria del rrincon, 
ni por maldonado El ancho, ni otro maldonado q se dezia 
alvaro maldonado El fiero q fue casado con vna senora q se 
dezia maria rias y tanbien se fue vn vargas vezino de la trini- 
dad q le llamavan en cuba, vargas el galan, no digo vargas 
El q fue suegro de xpoual lobo vz° que fue de guatimala, y 
se fue vn soldado de los de cortes q se dezia cardenas piloto 
aquel cardenas fue el que dixo, a vn su conpanero q como 
podiamos rreposar los soldados, teniendo dos rreyes En esta 
nueba espafia, Este fue a quien cortes dio trezientos pesos 
para q se fuese A su muger E hijos y por escusar prolixidad 
de ponelles todos por memoria, se fueron otros muchos q no 
me acuerdo bien sus nonbres y quando cortes les dio la lie* 
diximos q para q se la dava pues q Eramos pocos los q qda- 
vamos y rrespondio q por escusar Escandalos E inportuna- 
(^iones y q ya viamos q para la guerra algunos de los que se 
bolvian no lo Eran, y q valia mas estar solo q mal Aconpa- 
fiado, y para los despachar del puerto Enbio cortes a pedro 
de alvarado y En aviendolos Enbarcado q se bolviese luego 
a la villa y digamos Agora q tanbien Enbio A castilla A die- 
go de ordas y Alonso de mendo§a natural DE medellin de 
Cagares Con ^iertos Recabdos DE cortes q yo no se otros q 
llevase nros ni nos dio parte de Cosa de los negoQios que En- 
biava A tratar con su mag ni lo q paso En castilla yo no lo 
alcan§e A saber, salvo que A boca llena dezia El obispo de 
burgos, delante del diego de ordas q Asi cortes como todos 
los soldados q pasamos con el Eramos malos y traydores 
puesto quel ordaz rrespondia muy bien por todos nosotros, y 
Enton§es le dieron al ordas vna Encomienda de sefior san- 



472 

tiago y por armas al bolcan questaba Entre guaxogingo y 
^erca de cholula y lo q negoyio Adelante lo dire segund lo 
supimos por carta, /dexemos Esto aparte y dire como cortes 
Enbio Alonso de abila q Era capitan y contador desta nue- 
va espaiia y juntam*® con el Enbio A otro hidalgo q se dezia 
frangisco albarez chico q Era honbre q Entendio de negogios 
y mando q fuesen con otro navio para la ysla de santo do- 
mingo a hazer rrela§ion de todo lo acaesjido a la rrl avdien- 
§ia q En ella rresidia y a los frayles gr"*^ questaban por go- 
bernadores de todas las yslas q tuviesen por bueno lo q 
abiamos hecho En las conquistas y el desbarate de narvaez, 
y como avia hecho esclavos En los pueblos que avian muer- 
to espaiioles, y se avian quitado de la obidien§ia, q avian da- 
do a nro rrey y seiior y q asi Entendia hazer En todos los 
mas pueblos que fueron de la liga y nonbre de mexicanos y 
q les suplicava q hiziesen rrelagion dello En castilla A nro 
gran Enperador y tuviesen En la memoria los grandes sui**s 
q sienpre le haziamos y que por su inter§esion y de la rrl 
avdi^ y frayles gr""^ fuesemos fabores§idos con justi* contra 
la mala voluntad y obras q contra nosotros tratava El obis- 
po de burgos y arzobispo de rrosano y tanbien Enbio otro 
navio A la ysla de xamayca por cavallos y yeguas y el capi- 
tan que en el fue se dezia hulano de solis q despues de ga- 
nado mx^° le llamamos solis El de la huerta, yerno de vno 
q se dezia El bachiller ortega bien se q diran algunos Curio- 
sos letores q sin dineros q como ebiava a di® de ordas A ne- 
gogios a castilla, pues esta claro q para castilla y para otras 
partes son meuester dineros, y q asi mismo enbiava a alon- 
so de abila y a fran*^*^ alvarez El chico a santo domingo a ne- 
gogios y a la ysla de xamayca por cavallos y yeguas a esto 
digo que como al salir de mx^^ como salimos huyendo la no- 
che por mi muchas vezes memorada, q como qdava e la sa- 
la muchas barras de oro perdido, En vn monton q todos los 
mas soldados apanaban dello En espegial los de a cavallo y 
los de narvaez mucho mejor, y los ofigiales de su mag q la 
tenian En poder y cargo, llebaron los fardos hechos y demas 
desto quando se cargaron de oro mas de ochenta yndios tas- 



478 

caltecas por mandado de cortes y fueron los primeros q sa- 
lieron En las puentes, vista cosa Era q salvarian muchas 
cargas dello q no se perderia todo En la calfada, y como nos- 
otros los pobres soldaidos q no teniamos mando, sino ser man- 
dados, En aqlla sazon procuravamos de salvar nras vidas y 
despues de curar nras heridas, no miravamos En el oro si sa- 
lieron muchas cargas dello En las puentes, o no, ni se nos 
dava mucho por ello, y cortes con Algunos de nros capita- 
nes lo procuraron de aber de los tascaltecas q lo sacaron y 
tubimos sospecha q los qta mill ps de las partes de los de la 
villa rrica q tanbien lo ovo y echo fama q lo avian rrobado, 
y con ello Enbio a castilla a los negogios de su persona y a 
conprar cavallos y a la ysla de santo domingo a la avdi* rreal 
porq En aquel tienpo todos se callavan Con las barras de oro 
q tenian avnq mas pregones avia dado dexemos Esto y diga- 
mos como ya estavan de paz todos los pueblos comarcanos de 
tepeaca, Acordo cortes q quedase En la villa de segura 
de la frontera por capitan vn fran^ de orozco con obra de 
veynte soldados qstaban heridos y dolientes y con todos los 
mas de nro Exer^ito fuymos a tascala y se dio orden q 
se cortase madera para hazer treze vergantines para yr 
otra vez a mx®® porq hallavamos por muy §ierto q para la 
laguna sin vergantines no la podiamos senorear ni podia- 
mos dar guerra ni Entrar otra vez por las calgadas En aque- 
11a gran gibdad, sino con gran rriesgo de nras vidas. — y El 
que fue maestro de cortar la madera y dar El galico y cuenta 
y razon como abian de ser veleros y ligeros para aquel Efeto y 
los hizo, fue vn martin lopez q §iertamente, demas de' ser 
vn buen soldado En todas las guerras, sirvio muy bien a su 
mag En esto de los bergan tines y trabajo En ellos como fuer- 
te varon. y me pare^e que si por desdicha no viniere-En nra 
conpafiia de los primeros como vino q hasta Enbiar por otro 
maestro a castilla, se pasara mucho tienpo o no viniera nin- 
guno, segund El gran estorbo q En todo nos ponia El obis- 
po de Burgos bolvere a nra materia y digamos Agora q 
quando llegamos a tascala ya Era fallesgido de virguelas nro 
gran amigo y muy leal vasallo de su magestad mase Esca§i 

Bernal Dfaz del Castillo.— 41. 



474 

de la qual muerte nos peso a todos y cortes lo sintio tanto 
como el dezia como si fuera su padre, y se pusoluto de man- 
ias negras ^ y ansi mismo muchos de nros Capitanes y sol- 
dados// y a sus hijos y parientes del mase Escagi, cortes y 
todos nosotros les haziamos mucha honrra, y porq En tAS- 
cala.abia diferen§ias sobre El man do y ca^icazgo, sefialo y 
mando q lo fuese vn su hijo legitimo del mesmo Mase Es- 
cagi porq asi lo abia mandado su padre antes q muriese, y 
avn dixo a sus hijos y parientes q mirasen q no saliesen del 
paando de malinche y de sus hermanos porq giertam^® Era- 
mos los q aviamos de senorear estas trras y les dixo, otros 
muchos buenos consejos dexemos ya de con tar del mase Es- 
ca§i, pues Es ya el muerto, y digamos del xicotenga El vie- 
jo y de chichimecatecle y de todos los mas cagiques de tascala 
q se ofres^ieron de servir a cortes, ansi En cortar la madera 
para los vergantines, Como para todo lo demas q les quisle- 
sen mandar En la guerra contra mexicanos. cortes les abra- 
§0 con mucho amor y les dio gragias por ello, espe^ialmente 
A xicotenga El viejo y a chichimecatecle, y luego procure 
q se volviese xpiano y el buen viejo xicotenga de buena vo- 
luntad dixo q lo queria ser E con la mayor fiesta q En aque- 
11a sazon se pudo hazer En tascala, le babtizo El padre de la 
md y le puso nonbre don lorenzo de vargas. bolvamos a de- 
.zir de nros vergantines, quel martin lopez se dio tanta prie- 
sa En cortar la madera con la gran ayuda de yndios q le 
ayudava q En pocos dias la tenia ya toda cortada y seiiala- 
da su cuenta En cada madero, para q parte y lugar abia de 
ser, isegun tienen sus senales los ofigiales, maestros y carpin- 
teros de rribera, y tanbien le ayudava otro buen soldado q 
se dezia andres nunez, E vn viejo carpintero qstava coxo de 
vna herida q se dezia rramirez El viejo y luego Despacho 
Cortes A la billa Rica por mucho yerro y clabazon de los 
navios que dimos al travez y por anclas, y velas, y xargias y 
cables y estopa y por todo Aparejo de hazer navios y man- 
do venir todos los herreros q avia y a vn hernando de aguilar 

1 Teetado en el original: ''de lo que ee pudo aver en aqlla sazon." 



475 

q Era medio herrero q Ayudaba a machar, y porq En aql 
tienpo avia En nro ireal tres honbres q se dezian aguilar, 11a- 
mamos a este hernando de aguilar maxa yerro y Enbio por 
capitan A la villa rrica por los Aparejos q E dho pa manda- 
llo traer a vn santa cruz burgales rregidor q despues fue de 
mex*^*' persona muy buen soldado y diligente, y hasta las cal- 
deras para hazer brea y todo quanto de antes avian sacado 
de loB navios truxo Con mas de mill yndios q todos los pue- 
blos de aqllas provin§ias Enemigos de mexicanos, luego se 
los davan para traer las cargas pues como no teniamos pez 
pa brear ni avn los yndios lo sabian hazer, mando cortes a 
quatro honbres de la mar q sabian de aql ofi§io, q En vnos 
pinares §erca de guaxalgingo q los hay buenos fuesen a ha- 
zer la pez.*^ pasemos adelante y pueeto que no va muy a propo- 
sito de la materia En qstava hablando q me anpreguntado 
5iertos cavalleros curiososq cono§ian muy bien a AP deavi- 
la, q oomo siendo Capitan y muy Esforgado y Era contador 
de la nueva espana y siendo belieoso y su ynclina^ion dado 
mas para guerras q no para yr a. soligitar negogios con los 
fraylesgeronimos qstavan por governadores de todas las ys- 
las, q por q cavsa le Enbio cortes teniendo otros honbres q 
fueran mas Acostunbrados a neg05ios, oomo Era vnAlonso 
de grado, o vn Juan de oageres, El rrico, y otros q me non- 
braron a esto digo, q cortes le Enbio al aP de abilaporq sin- 
tio. del ser muy varon, y porq osaria rresponder por nosotros 
conformeaJust* y tanbien le enbio por cavsa q como El 
alonso de abila abia tenido diferengias con otros capitanes y 
tenia gran atrebimi^ de dezir a cortes qnalquiera cosa q via 
q convenia dezille y por escusar rruydos y por dar la Gapi- 
tania q tenia Andres de tapia y la contaduria alonso de gra- 
do, como luego se la dio, por estas rrazones le Enbio. bolva- 
mos a nra rrelagion pues viendo cortes q ya Era cortada la 

1 Tachado en el original: **Acuerdome q fue El q llebo cargo dello E yva 
por capitan vn Juan rrodriguez cabrillo q fue vn buen soldado En lo de mx°*' q 
despues fue vz* de guatim* persona muy honrrada y fue capitan y almirante 
de treze navios por p* de alvarado y sirvio muy bien a su mag en todo lo que 
Be le ofres^io y murio En su rreal servigio.?' 



476 

madera para los vergantines y se abian ydo A cuba las per- 
8onas por mi nonbradas, q Eran de los de narvaez q los te- 
niamos por sobrehuesos espegialmente poniendo temores q 
sienpre nos ponian q no seriamos bastantes para rresistir El 
gran poder de mexicanos, quando oyan q deziamos q Abia- 
mos de yr u poner ^ereo sobre mx*^ y libre de aquellas S050- 
bras Acordo Cortes q fuesemos con todos nros sol dados para 
la §ibdad de tezcuco y sobrello ovo grandes e muchos acuer- 
dos, porq vnos soldados dezian q Era mejor sitio y ayequias 
y 9anjas para hazer los bergan tines En Ayo^ingo xunto a 
chalco q no En la ^anja y estero y otros porfiavamos q me- 
Jor seria En tezcuco por estar en parte y sitio igerca de mu- 
chos pueblos y q teniendo aqlla Qibdad por nosotros desde 
alii hariamos Entradas En las tierras comarcanas de mexico 
y puestos En aqlla ^ibdad, tomariamos el mejor pares^er co- 
mo subgediesen las cosas, pues ya qstaba acordado lo por mi 
dho, viene nueva y cartas q truxeron soldados E como abia 
venido A la villa rrica vn navio de castilla y de las yslas de 
canaria, de buen porte cargado de muchas mercaderias, es- 
copetas, polbora y vallestas E hilo de vallestas y tres cava- 
llos y otras armas, y venia por sefior de la mercaderia y na- 
vio vn Juan de burgos y por maestre vn frangisco de Amedel 
y venian treze soldados y con aqlla nueva nos Alegramos En 
gran manera y si de antes q supiesemos del navio nos dava- 
mos priesa En la partida para tezcuco, mucho mas nos dimos 
Enton§es, porq luego le Enbio cortes conprar todas las ar- 
mas y polvora y todo lo mas q traya y avn el mismo Juan 
de burgos y el medel y todos los pasageros que traya se vi- 
nieron luego por donde Estavamos, con los quales rres^ebi- 
mos contento viendo tan buen sbcorro y En tal tienpo. Acuer- 
dome q Entonjes vino vn juan del espinar vezino que fue 
de guatimala, persona q fue muy rrico y tanbien vino vn 
vizcayno que se dezia monjaraz, tio que se dezia ser de an- 
dres de monjaraz, tanbien vino vn sagredo tio de vna muger 
q se dezia la sagreda que Estava en cuba, naturales de la vi- 
lla de medellin y gregorio de monjaraz soldados q Estavan 
con nosotros y padre de vna muger q despues vino a mex^ 



i 



477 

que se dezia la monjarasa muy hermosa miiger, E traygo 
Esto aqui a la memoria, por lo q adelante dire, y Es que 
xamas fue el monjaraz a guerra ninguna ni Entrada con nos- 
otros porq andava doliente En aquel tienpo e ya q Estaba 
muy bueno y sano E presumia de valiente quando teniamos 
puesto 5erco a mexico, dixo el monjara/i que queria yr A ver 
como batallavamos con los mexicanos porq no tenia a los 
mexicanos por valientes, y fue y se subio En vn alto Cu co- 
mo torre§illa y nunca supimos como ni de q manera le ma- 
taron yndios En aquel mismo dia y muchas personas dixe- 
ron que le avian conos^ido En la ysla de santo domingo, q 
fue permision divina que muriese aqlla muerte porq avia 
muerto a su muger muy honrrada y buena persona sin cul- 
pa ninguna y que busco testigos falsos q juraron que le ha- 
zia malefi^io. quiero ya dexar de Contar cosas pasadas y di- 
gamos como fuymos a la §ibdad de tezcuco y lo que mas 
paso. 



CAPITULO CXXXVIL Como caminamos 
con todo nro Exergito, camino de la (jib- 
dad de tezcuco, y lo que En el camino nos 
avino y otras cosas q pasaron. 




OMO cortes vio tan buen aparejo ansi de Escopetas 
y polvora y vallestas y cavallos y conos§io de to- 
dos nosotros ansi capitanes como soldados, el gran 
deseo que teniamos destar ya sobre la gran gibdad de mexi- 
co, acordo de hablar a los caciques de Tascala para que le 
diesen diez mill yndios de guerra que fuesen con nosotros a 
Aquella Jornada hasta tezCuco ques vna DE las mayores §ib- 
dades que hay En toda la nueva espana, despues de mexico 



478 

y como se lo demando y les hizo vn buen parlamento sobre- 
llo, luego xicotenga El viejo q En aqlla sazon se avia vuelto 
xpiano y se Uamo don lorenzo de vargas, Como dho tengo, 
dixo q le plazia de buena voluntad no solamente diez mill 
honbres sino muchos mas si los qria llevar E q yria por ca- 
pitan del los otroOagique muy Esforgado E nro gran amigo 
q se dezia chichi mecatecle, y cortes le dio las gra9ias por ello, 
y despues de hecho nro alarde que ya no me Acuerdo bien q 
tanta copia Eramos, Ansi de soldados como de los demas vn 
dia despues de pasada la pasqua de navidad del afio de mill 
E quinientos y veynte afios, Comen§amos A caminar con 
mucho con^ierto como lo teniamos de costunbre y fuymos 
A dormir A vn pueblo q se dize su subjeto y los del mismo 
pueblo nos dieron lo que aviamos menester, de alii adelante 
Era tierra de mexicanos yvamos mas rrecatados nra artille- 
ria puesta en mucho congierto y vallesteros y Escopeteros y 
sienpre quatro corredores del canpo a cavallo y otros quatro 
soldados despada y rrodela tnuy sueltos juntam^ con los de 
a cavallo para ver los pasos si Estavan para pasar cavallos 
porq En el camino tuvimos aviso questava Enbara§ado de 
aquel dia vn mal paso y la sierra con arboles cortados por- 
que bien tuvieron noti§ia En mexico y en tezcuco como ca- 
minavamos hazia su gibdad y aquel dia no hallamos Estor- 
bo ninguno y fuymos a dormir al pie de la sierra q serian 
tres leguas y aquel la noche tuvimos buen frio y con nras 
rrondas y Espias E velas y corredores del canpo la pasamos, 
y desque amanesgio comengamos a subir vn portezuelo y En 
vnos malos pasos como barrancas Estaba cortada la sierra 
por donde no podiamos pasar, y puesta mucha madera E pi- 
nos En el camino y como Uevavamos tantos amigos tascal- 
tecas, En poco se desEmbara§o, y con mucho con9ierto cami- 
namos con vna capitania de escopeteros y vallesteros delante 
y nros amigos cortando y apartando los arboles para poder 
pasar los cavallos, hasta q subimos la sierr;a, y avn bajamos, 
vn poco abajo a donde se descubrio la laguna de mexico y 
sus grandes ^ibdades pobladas En el agua y desque la vimos 
dimos muchas grayias a dios q nos la torno dexar a ver. en 



479 

ton§es nos acordamos de nro desbarate pasado de quando nos 
Echaron de mexico y prometimos si dios fuese servido de 
tener otra manera En la guerra, desque la §ercasemos y lue- 
go baxamos la sierra donde vimos grandes ahumadas que 
hazian ansi los de tezcuco como los de los pueblos sus subjetos, 
E yendo mas adelante topamos con vn buen Esquadron de 
gente guerreros de mexico y de tezcuco q nos aguardaban En 
vn mal paso a vn arcabue§o a donde Estava vna puente co- 
mo quebrada de madera algo honda y corria buen golpe de 
agua mas luego desbaratamos los Esquadrones y pasamos 
muy a nro salvo- pues oyr la grita que nos davan desde las 
Estan^ias y barrancas, no hazian otra cosa y Era en parte q 
no podian correr cavallos y nros amigos los tascaltecas les 
apanavan gallinas y lo q podian rroballes no lo dexavan pues- 
to q Cortes se lo mandava q si no diesen guerra q no se la 
diesen, y los tascaltecas dezian q si Estuvieran de buenos co- 
ragones y de paz que no salieran al camino a darnos guerra, 
Como Estavan al paso de las barrancas y puente para no nos 
dexar pasar. bolbamos a nra materia y digamos Como fuy- 
mos a dormir a vn pueblo subjeto de tezcuco y estava despo- 
blado y puestas nras velas y rrondas y Escuchas y corredores 
de canpo, Estuvimos aquella noche con bastante cuydado 
no diesen aquella noche en nosotros muchos Esquadrones de 
guerreros q Estavan aguardandonos En vnos malos pasos, 
de lo qual tubimos abiso porq se prendieron ginco mexica- 
nos En la puente primera q dho tengo y aqllos dixeron lo q 
pasava de los Esquadrones y segund despues supimos no se 
atrevieron A darnos guerra ni mas aguardar porq segun pa- 
res§io Entre los mexicanos y los de tezcuco, tenian diferen- 
§ias y bandos y tanbien, Como avn no estavan muy sanos de 
las virhuelas q fue dolengia q En toda la trra dio y cundio, 
y como avian sabido como En lo de guacachula E o§ucar y 
En tepeaca y xala§ingo y Castilblanco, todas las guarnigio- 
nes mexicanas Abiamos desbaratado y ansi mismo teniamos 
fama y ansi lo creyan q yban co nosotros En nra conpania 
todo El poder de tascala y guaxalgingo, Acordaron de no nos 
aguardar y todo esto nro senor jhesuxpo lo Encaminava, y 



480 

desq Amanesfio puestos todos nosotros En gran con^ierto, 
Ansi artilleria como escopetas y vallestas y los corredorea 
del canpo Adelante descubriendo trra, comen^amos a cami- 
nar hazia tezcuco q seria de alii de donde dormimos obra de 
dos leguas, E avn no aviamos andado media legua cuando vi- 
mos bolver nros Corredores del canpo a mata cavallo muy 
alegres E dixeron a cortes que venian hasta diez yndios y q 
trayan vnas seiias y beletas de oro y q no trayan armas nin- 
gunas y q En todas las caserias y estanQias por do pasavan 
no les daban grita ni bozes como Abian dado el dia antes. 
Al paresger todo estava de paz y cortes y todos nros capita- 
nes y soldados nos Alegramos y luego mando cortes a rre- 
parar hasta q llegaron siete yndios prin§ipales naturales de 
tezCuco y trayan vna vandera de oro E vna langa larga y 
antes q llegasen abaxaron su bandera y se humillaron q Es 
senal de paz, y desq llegaron ante Cortes Estando dona ma- 
rina y gr™® de aguilar, nras lenguas delante dixeron malin- 
che cocoyoa§in nro senor y senor de tezcuco, te Enbia A rro- 
gar q le quieras rre§ebir A tu amistad y te Esta esperando 
de paz En su gibdad de tezcuco y En senal dello rrecibe esta 
vandera de oro y q te pide por md q mandes a todos los tas- 
caltecas y a tus hermanos q no les hagan mal En su trra y 
q te vayas Aposentar A su gibdad quel te dara lo q ovieres 
menester, y mas dixeron q los esquadrones q alii estavan En 
las barrancas y pasos malos q no Eran de tezcuco, sino me- 
xicanos q los Enbiaba guatemuz, y quando cortes oyo aqllas 
pazes holgo mucho dellas y ansi mismo todos nosotros, E 
Abrago a los mensageros En especial A tres dellos q Eran 
parientes del buen montezuma y los conosgiamos todos los 
mas soldados q avian sido sus capitanes y considerada la En- 
baxada luego mando cortes llamar los capitanes tascaltecas 
y les mando muy Afectuosamente q no hiziesen ningun mal 
ni les tomasen cosa ninguna En toda la trra porquestavan 
de paz y ansi lo yzieron como se lo mando, mas comida no 
se les defendia si Era solamente mayz y frisoles y avn galli- 
nas y perrillos q avia muchos todas las casas llenas dello, y 
Entonges cortes tomo consejo con nros capitanes y a todos 



481 

les paresgio q Aquel pedir de paz y de aqlla manera q Era 
fingido porq si fueran verdaderasj no vinieran tan arrebata- 
damente y avn truxeran bastimento y con todo Esto Cortes 
rresQibio la vandera q valia hasta ochenta pesos y dio muchas 
gragias A los mensageros y les dixo q no tenia por costunbre 
hazer mal ni dano A ningunos vasallos de su mag antes les 
favoresyia y mirava por ellos y que si guardavan las pazes q 
dezian q les favores§eria contra mexieanos Eque ya abia man- 
dado a los tascaltecas q no hiziesen dano En su trra como 
abian visto y que ansi lo cunpliria Adelante y q bien sabia q 
En aqlla gijbdad mataron sobre quarenta espanoles nros her- 
manos quando salimos de mex*^ y sobre doszientos tascalte- 
cas y que rrobaron muohas cargas de oro y otros despojos 
q dellos ovieron q rruega A su seiior Cuacayutzin y a todos 
los mas ca§iques y capitanes de tezcuco q le den El o;ro y rro- 
pa y que la muerte de los Espanoles, que pues no tenia ya 
remedio q no se les pedira, y rrespondieron Aquellos mensa- 
geros que Ellos se lo dirian a su seJBor ansi como se lo man- 
daba mas quel que los mando matar fue El que En aquel 
tienpo Al§aron En mexico por senor, despues de muerto 
montezuma q se dezia coadlabaca E obo todo El despoJo y 
le llevaron a mex*^ todos los mas de los tevles y q luego los 
sacrificaron A su huychilobos, y desque Cortes vio aquella 
rrespuesta, por no los rresabiar ni atemorizar no les rreplico 
En ello sino que fuesen con dios y quedo vno dellos En nra 
conpania y luego nos fuymos A vnos Arrabales de tezcuco 
que se dezian guavtinchan o guaxuntan q ya se me A olvi- 
dado El nonbre y alii nos dieron bien de comer y todo lo q 
obimos men ester y avn derribamos vnos ydolos questavan 
En vnos aposentos donde posavamos y otro dia de manana 
fuymos A la §ibdad de tezcuco y En todas las calles ni casas 
no viamos mugeres ny muchachos, ny nifios sino todos los 
yndios como asonbrados y como gente questaba de guerra y 
fuymos Aposentar a vnos grandes Aposentos y salas y luego 
mando cortes llamar a nros capitanes y todos los mas solda- 
dos y nos dixo q no saliesemos de vnos patios grandes q alii 
abia y qstubiesemos muy apergebidos porq no se parecjia 

Beraal Diaz del Castillo.— 62. 



482 

questava aquella gibdad pagifica, basta ver como y de q ma- 
nera, Estava y mando A pedro de albarado y a xpoual de 
oli e a otros soldados y a mi con ellos que subiesemos a vn 
gran cu q Era bien alto y llevasemos hasta veynte Escope- 
teros para nra guarda y q mirasemos desde El alto Cu la la- 
guna y la §ibdad porq bien se pare89ia toda y vimos q to- 
dos los moradores de aquellas poblazones se yvan con sus 
haziendas y hatos E hijos, E mugeres, vnos a los montes y 
otros a los carrizales q hay En la laguna y q toda yba qua- 
xada de canoas dellas grandes y otras chicas y como cortes 
lo supo quiso prender al sefior de tezcuco q enbio la vande- 
ra de oro y quando lo fueron a llamar giertos papas q en- 
bio cortes por mensageros ya estava puesto En cobro quel 
prim® q se fue huyendo a mex*^ fue El con otros muchos 
pringipales y ansi se paso aquella noche q tuvimos grande 
rrecavdo de velas y rrondas y espias, y otro dia muy de ma- 
nana mando cortes llamar A todos los mas pringipales yn- 
dios q avia En tezcuco porq como es gran gibdad abia otrod 
muchos sefiores partes contrarias del ca§ique q se fue huyen- 
do con quien tenian debates y diferen9ias sobre El mando y 
rreyno de Aquella ^ibdad y venidos ante cortes E ynforma- 
do dellos como y de q manera y desde q tienpo Aca sefio- 
reaba el cuacoyotzin dixeron q por cobdi§ia de rreynar abia 
muerto malam^ a,su hermano mayor q se dezia Cuxcuxca, 
con fabor q para ello le dio El sefior de mexico que ya E 
dho otras veges que se dezia. coadlavaca, El qual fue El q nos 
dio la guerra quando salimos huyendo despues de muerto 
montezuma; E q alii avian otros sefiores a quien venia el 
rreyno de tezCuco mas Justam^ q no al que lo tenia q Era 
vn mangebo que luego En aquella sazon se bolvio xpiano con 
mucha solenidad y se llama don hernando cortes porq fue 
su padrino nro capitan. E aqueste mangebo dixeron q hera 
hijo legitimo del sefior y rrey de tezcuco que se dezia su pa- 
dre neQabalpin§intle y luego sin mas dilagiones y Con gran 
fiesta y rregogijo de todo tezcuco le algaron por rrey y sefior 
natural con todas las §erimonias q a los tales rreyes solian 
hazer E con mucha paz y En amor de todos sus vasallos 



488 

y otros pueblos comarcanos y mandaba muy asolutamente y 
Era obedesgido y para le mejor industriar En las cosas de nra 
santa fe y ponelle En toda puli§ia y deprendiese nra lengua 
mando cortes que tubiese por Ayo a Antonio de villa rreal, 
marido q fue de vna senora muy hermosa q se dixo ysabel 
de Ojeda E a vn bachiller que se dezia escobar y puso por 
capitan de tezcueo porque viese y defendiese q no contrata- 
sen con el don hernando ni ningun mexicano a vn buen sol- 
dado que se dezia pero sanchez farfan, marido q fue de la 
buena E honrrada muger maria destrada. dexemos de con- 
tar su gran servigio de Aqueste ca§ique y digamos quan 
Amado y obedes^ido fue de los suyos y digamos Como cor- 
tes le demando mucha copia de yndios trabajadores para En- 
sanchar y abrir mas las A§equias y ^angas por donde abia- 
mos de sacar los bergantines A la laguna desquestuviesen 
Acabados y puestos a punto para yr A la vela, y se le dio A 
Entender Al mismo don hernando y a otros sus prin5ipales 
A q fin y Efeto se avian de hazer y como y de q manera 
Aviamos de poner gerco A mexico y para todo Ello se ofres- 
9io con todo su poder y vasallos y no solamente aquello q 
le mandava sino q Enbiaria mensageros A otros pueblos Co- 
marcanos para q se diesen por vasallos de su mag y tomasen 
nra Amistad y boz contra mx^ y todo esto congertado des- 
pues de nos aber Aposentado muy bien y cada capitan por 
si y senalados los puestos y lugares donde aviamos de Acu- 
dir si obiese rrebato de mexicanos porquestamos a guarda la 
rraya de su laguna y porq de quando En quando enbiaba 
guatemuz grandes piraguas y canoas con muchos guerreros 
y venian a ver si nos tomaban descuydados y En Aqlla sa- 
zon vinieron de paz §iertos pueblos subgetos A tezcueo A de- 
mandar perdon y paz si En algo avian herrado En las gue- 
rras pasadas y avian sido En muertes despanoles los quales 
se dezian guatinchan y ^ y cortes les hablo a todos muy Amo- 
rosamente y les perdono — quiero dezir q no avia dia nin- 
guno q dexasen de andar En la obra y §anja y agequia de 

1 Hay un espacio en bianco en el original. 



484 

syete v ocho mill yndios y lo abrian y Ensanchavan muy 
bien q podian nadar por ella nabios de gran porte y En aque- 
Ua sazon como teniamos En nra conpania sobre siete mill 
tascaltecas y estavan deseosos de ganar honrra y de guerrear 
contra mexicanos, Acordo cortes q pues tan fieles conpane- 
ros teniamos q fuesemos A Entrar y dar vna vista a vn buen 
pueblo q se dize yztapalapa, El qual pueblo fue por donde 
aviamos pasado quando la primera vez benimos a mx*' y el 
senor del fue El q al§aron por rrey En mx^ despues de la 
muerte del gran, montezuma q ya E dho otras vezes que 
se decia coadlabaca y de aqueste pueblo segund supimos rres- 
§ebiamos mucho dafio porq Eran muy contrarios Contra 
chaleo y tamanalco y mecameca y chimaloacan q querian 
venir A tener nra Amistad y ellos lo estorvavan y como 
avia ya doze dias qstavamos En tezcuco sin hazer cosa q de 
contar sea ma& de lo por mi ya dho fuymos Aqlla Entrada 
de yztapalapa, y lo q alii paso dire adelante. 



CAPITULO CXXX VIII— Como fuymos A 
yztapalapa con cortes y llevo En su con- 
pania a xpoiial de oli y a p° de albarado 
y qdo gongalo de sandoval por guarda de 
tezcuco, y lo q nos AcaesQio En la toma 
de aquel pueblo y otras cosas q alii se 
hizieron. 

pues Como avia doze dias qstavamos En tezcuco y no tenian 
los tascaltecas por mi ya otras vezes memorados con q se sus- 
tentar y para que lo tuviesen tantos como Eran porq no se 
lo podian dar abastadam** los de tezcuco y porq no rresjibie- 
sen pesadunbre dellos y tanbien porqstavan deseosos los tas- 
caltecas de guerrear con mexicanos y se vengar por los mu- 



485 

chos tascaltecas q En las derrotas pasadas, por mi memoradas 
les Avian muerto y sacrificado Acordo cortes q el por capi- 
tan general y con andres de tapia y xpoual de oli y treze de 
a cavallo y veynte ballesteros y seys escopeteros y dosgien- 
tos y veynte soldadoe y con nros Amigos los de tascala y con 
otros veynte prin^ipalea de tezcuco q nos dio don her^** y estos 
sabiamos q Eran sus primos y parientes del mismo Cagique 
y Enemigos de guatemuz q ya le abian al§ado por rrey En 
mexico, fuymos camino de yztapalapa qstara de tezcuco obra 
de cuatro leguas ya E dho otras vezes En el capitulo^ q so- 
brello habla que estavan mas de la mitad de las casas Edifi- 
cadas En el agua y la otra mitad en tierra firme, e yendo 
nro Camino eon mucho congierto, como lo teniamos de cos- 
tunbre y como los mexicanos sienpre tenian velas y guarni- 
§iones y guerreros Contra nosotros quando sabian q y vamos 
a dar guerra algunos de sus pueblos para luego le socorrer, 
Ansi lo hizieron saber a los de yztapalapa para q se aper§i- 
biesen y les Enbiaron sobre ocho mill mexicanos de socorro, 
por manera q En tierra firme aguardaron Como buenos gue- 
rreros, ansi los mexicanos q fueron En su ayuda, como los 
del pueblo de yztapalapa y pelearon'vn buen rrato muy ba- 
lerosam*® con nosotros, mas los de a cavallo rronpieron por 
Ellos y con las vallestas y Escopetas y todos nros amigos los 
tascaltecas q se metian En ellos como perros rrabiosos^ de 
presto dexaron el canpo y se metieron En su pueblo, y Es- 
to fue sobre cosa pensada y con vn ardid q Entrellos tenian 
Acordado que fuera harto dafio para nosotros si de presto no 
salieramos de aquel pueblo donde ellos entravan, y fue desta 
manera que hizieron que huyeron y se metieron En canoas 
En el agua y En las casas q tenian en la laguna y otros de- 
llos en vnos carrizales, y como ya Era noche oscura nos dexan 
aposentar En tierra firme sin hazer rruido ni muestras de 
guerra y con el despojo q aviamos avido Estavamos conten- 
tos y mas con la vitoria y estando de Aqlla manera puesto 
q teniamos velas y espias y rrondas y avn corredores del 

1 Hay un espacio en bianco en el original. 



486 

canpo, quando no nos catamos, vino tanta agua por todo el 
pueblo, que si los prin§ipales que llevavamos de tezcuco no 
dieran vozes y nos avisaran que saliesemos presto de las ca- 
sas a tierra firme, todos quedaramos ahogados porque solta- 
ron las agequias de agua dulge y salada y abrieron vna cal- 
§ada con que de presto se hinchio todo de aguay los tascaltecas 
nros amigos, como no Eran acostunbrados al agua y no sa- 
ben nadar, quedaron muertos dos dellos y nosotros con gran 
rriesgo de nras personas todos bien mojados y la pblvora per- 
dida salimos sin hato y como Estavamos de aqlla manera y 
Con mucho frio y avn sin §enar, pasamos mala noche, y lo 
peor de todo Era la burla y la grita E silvos quellos ponian 
q nos davan los de yztapalapa y los mexicanos desde sus ca- 
sas y canoas. pues otra cosa peor nos avino, q Como En 
mex^ savian El con5ierto q tenian hecho de nos anegar con 
aver rronpido la cal§ada y agequias, Estaban Esperando En 
tierra y En la laguna muchos batallones de guerreros y desque 
amanesgio nos dan tanta guerra que harto teniamos de nos 
sustentar contrellos, no nos desbaratasen, e mataron dos sol- 
dados y vn cavallo E hirieron otros muchos ansi de nros 
sol dados como tascaltecas, y poco A poco Afloxaron En la 
guerra y nos bolvimos A tezcuco medio afrentados de la bur- 
la E ardid de echarnos El agua y tanbien como no ganamos 
mucha rreputayion En la batalla postrera q nos dieron porq 
no abia polvora, mas todavia quedaron temerosos y tuvieron 
bien En q Entender En Enterrar o qmar muertos, y curar 
heridos y En rreparar sus casas, donde los dexare Como vi- 
nieron de paz A tezcuco otros pueblos y lo q mas se hizo. 



487 



CAPITULO CXXXVII [CXXXIX] como 
vinieron tres pueblos comarcanos de tez- 
cuco A demandar pazes y perdon de las 
guerras pasadas y muertes despanoles y 
los descargos q davan sobrello, y de co- 
mo fue gonzalo de sandoval A chalco y ta- 
manalco En su socorro contra mexicanos y 
lo q mas paso. 

5BIEND0 dos dias questavamos En tezcuco de buel- 
ta de la entrada de yztapalapa, vinieron a cortes 
tres pueblos de paz a demandar perdon de las gue- 
rras pasadas y de muertes despafioles q mataron y los des- 
cargos q davan, Era quel senor de mx** q al(;aron despues 
de la muerte del gran montezuma, q se dezia coadlavaca q 
por su man dado salieron a dar guerra con los demas sus va- 
sal los, y q si algunos tevles mataron y prendieron y rroba- 
ron, quel mysmo seiior les mando q se los llevasen a mx~ q 
asi lo hiziesen, y los tevles q se los llebaron a mx^ para sa- 
crificar, y tanbien se llevaron El oro y cavallos y rropa, y 
q agora que piden perdon por ello, y q por esta cavsa q no 
tienen culpa ninguna por ser mandados y apremiados por 
fuer§a para q lo hiziesen; y los pueblos q digo q En aquella 
sazon vinieron se dezian tepezcuco E otunba. El nonbre del 
otro pueblo no me acuerdo; mas se dezir q En este del otun- 
ba fue la nonbrada batalla q nos dieron quando salimos hu- 
yendo de mx*^ A donde Estuvieron Juntos los mayores es- 
quadrones de guerreros que abido En toda la nueva espana 
contra nosotros, A donde creyeron q no escaparamos con las 




488 

vidas, segun mas largo lo tengo Escrito En los capitulos pa- 
sados q dello habla, y como Aqllos pueblos se hallavan Cul- 
pados y avian visto q aviamos ydo A lo de yztapalapa y no 
les fue muy bien con nra yda, y avnq nos quisieron Anegar 
con el agua, y esperarop dos batallas canpales con muchos 
Esquadrones mexicanos, En fin, por no se hallar En otra co- 
mo las pasadas, vinierori a deihandar pazes, antes q fuesemos 
a sus pueblos A los castigar; y cortes, viendo q no estava En 
tienpo de hazer otra cosa, les perdono puesto q les dio gran- 
des rreprehensiones sobrello y se obligaron con palabras de 
muchos ofres§imientos de sienpre ser cantra mexicanos y 
de ser vasallos de su mag, y de nos servir, y ansi lo hizieron. 
dexemos de hablar destos pueblos, y digamos como vinieron 
luego En aqlla sazon a demandar pazes y nra Amistad, los 
de vn pueblo questa En la laguna q se dize mezquique, q 
por otro nonbre le llamavamos beneguela, y Estos segund 
pares5io, Jamas estuvieron bien con mexicanos y los qria mal 
de Cora§on, y cortes y todos nosotros tuvimos En mucho la 
venida deste pueblo por estar dentro En el agua por tenellos 
por amigos, y con ellos creyamos que avian de convocar A 
sus comarcanos q tanbien estaban poblados En el agua, y 
cortes se lo Agradesgio mucho y Con ofresgimientos y pala- 
bras blandas les despidio. pues estando questavamos desta 
manera vinieron a dezir A Cortes como venian grandes es- 
quadrones de mexicanos sobrellos quatro pueblos q primero 
avian venido a nra Amistad q se dezian guatinchan o gua- 
xultlan, los otros dos pueblos no se me acuerda El nonbre 
y dixeron a cortes q no osarian esperar En sus casas E q se 
qrian yr A los montes o venirse A tezcuco, a donde Estamos 
y tantas cosas le dixeron A cortes para q les fuese a socorrer, 
q luego apergibio veynte de cavallo y dozientos soldados, y 
treze vallesteros, y diez escopeteros y llevo En su conpafiia 
A p® de albarado y xpoual de oli, q Era mase DE canpo y 
fuymos a los pueblos q vinieron a cortes A dar tantas qxas 
como dho tengo questaria de tezcuco obra de dos leguas y 
segund pares§io q Era verdad q los mexicanos les enbiavan 
avisar con amenazas q les avian de destruir y dalles guerra 



489 

porq abian tornado nra amistad, mas sobrelo q mas les ame- 
nazavan y tenian contiendas, Eran por vnas grandes labores 
de trras de mayzales questavan ya para coger §erca de la la- 
guna donde los de tezcuco y aqllos pueblos baste§iaii nro 
rreal, y los mexicanos por tomarles El mayz porq dezian q 
Era suyo y aqlla vega de los mayzales tenian por costunbre 
Aquellos quatro pueblos de los senbrar y benefi§iar para los 
papas de los ydolos mexicanos, y sobresto destos mayzales se 
Avian muerto los vnos a los otros muchos yndios, y desq 
aquello etendio cortes despues de les dezir q no oviesen mie- 
do, y q se estuviesen En sus casas, les mando que quando 
oviesen de yr a coxer El mayz, asi para su mantenimi^ como 
para bastecer nro rreal, q Enbiaria para ello vn capitan con 
muchos de cavallo y soldados para En guarda de los q fue- 
ran a traer El mayz; y con aquello q cortes les dixo, qdaron 
muy contentos y nos volvimos a tezcuco, y dende En adelan- 
te quando abia nejesidad En nro rreal de mayz apergebia- 
mos a los tamemes de todos aquellos pueblos E con nros ami- 
gos los de tascala y con diez de cavallo y yient soldados con 
algunos vallesteros y escopeteros yvamos por el mayz, y es- 
to digolo porq yo fuy dos vezes por ello y la vna tuvimos vna 
buena escaramuga con grandes Esquadrones de mexicanos q 
avian venido En mas de mill canoas Aguardandonos En los 
mayzales y como llebavamos Amigos puesto q los mexica- 
nos pelearon muy como varones, los hizimos Enbarcar En 
sus canoas y alii mataron vno de nros soldados E hirieron 
doze y asi mismo hirieron §iertos tascaltecas y ellos no se 
fueron mucho alabando q alii qdaron tendidos quinze o veyn- 
te y otros ^inco q llebamos presos. Dexemos de hablar desto 
y digamos como otro dia tuvimos nueva como qrian venir 
de paz los de chalco y tamanalco y sus subjetos y por cavsa de 
las guarni§iones mexicanas qstavan En sus pueblos no les 
davan lugar a ello y les hazian mucho dano En su trra y 
les tomavan las mugeres. En demas si heran hermosas y de- 
lante de sus padres, o madres, o maridos tenian Ageso con 
ellas y ansi mismo como estava cortada en tascala y puesta 
A punto la madera para hazer los vergantines y se pasava 

Bernal Diaz del CastiUo.— 63. 



490 

El tienpo sin traerla a tezcuco, sentiamos mucha pena dello 
todos los mas soldados y demas desto vienen del pueblo de 
bene§uela q se dezia mezquique y de otros pueblos nros ami- 
gos A dezir A cortes q los mexicanos les yvan a dar guerra 
porq an tornado nra amistad, y tanbien nros amigos los tas- 
calteeas, como tenian ya Apanada §ierta rropilla y sal y otras 
cosas de despojos e oro y qrian algunos de ellos bolver a su 
trra no osavan por no tener camino seguro, pues viendo cor- 
tes q para socorrer a vnos pueblos de los q le demandavan 
socorro e yr A ayudar los de chalco para q viniesen a nra 
amistad no podia dar rrecavdos a vnos ni a otros. porq alii 
En tezcuco aviamos menester Estar sienpre la barba sobre El 
honbro y muy alerta y lo q Acordo qtodo se dexase atras y 
la primera cosa q se hiziese fuese yr a chalco y tamanalco 
y para ello Enbio a gongalo de sandoval y a frangisco DE 
lugo Con quinze DE A caballo y dpzientos soldados y con es- 
copeteros y vallesteros y nros amigos los de tascala E que 
procurase de rronper y deshazer En todas maneras A las guar- 
ni§iones mexicanas y q se fuesen de chalco y tamanalco por- 
qstubiese El camino de tascala muy desEnbara9ado y pudie- 
sen yr y venir a la villa Rica sin tener contradi§ion de los 
guerreros mexicanos y luego como esto fue con§ertado muy 
secretamente con yndios de tezcuco se les hizo saber a los de 
chalco para questuviesen muy Aper§ebidos para dar de dia 
o de noche En las guarni§iones mexicanas y los de chalco q 
no esperavan otra cosa, se Apergibieron muy bien y como el 
gongalo de sandoval yba con su Exer§ito paresgiole q Era 
bien dexar en la rretaguardia, yinco de a cavallo y otros tan- 
tos vallesteros con todos los mas tascaltecas que yvan carga- 
dos de los despojos q avian avido y como los mexicanos sien- 
pre tenian puestas velas y espias y savian como los nros yban 
camino de chalco tenian Aparejados nuevamente sin los qs- 
tavan En chalco en guarniyion, muchos Esquadrones de gue- 
rreros q dieron En la reyaga donde yvan los tascaltecas con 
su hato y los trataron mal q no les pudieron rresestir los 
§inco de cavallo y ballesteros porq los dos vallesteros qda- 
ron muertos y los demas heridos, de manera q avnquel gon- 



491 

§alo de Sandoval muy de presto bolvio sobrellos y los desba- 
rato y mato diez mexicanos y eomo estava la laguna gerca 
se le acoxieron En las canoas en que abian venido y porq to- 
das aqllas trras estan muy pobladas de los subjetos de mx~ 
y desq los hubo puesto En huyda E vio q los §inco de a ca- 
vallo q abia dexado con los ballesteros y escopeteros en la 
rretaguarda Eran dos de los ballesteros muertos y estavan 
los demas heridos Ellos y sus cavallos y avn con haberlo visto 
todo esto no dexo de dezilles a los demas q dexo en su defen- 
sa q avian sido para poco no aver podido rresistir A los Ene- 
migos y defender sus personas y de nros amigos E estava 
muy Enojado dellos, porq era de los nuevam*® benidos de 
cast* y les dixo, q bien le paresgia q no sabian q cosa era ge- 
rra, y luego puso En salvo todos los yndios de tascala con su 
rropa y tanbien despacho vnas cartas q ebio cortes A la villa 
rrica En q En ellas Enbio a dezir al capitan q En ella qdo 
todo lo acaesgido Acerca de nras conquistas y el pensamy° q 
tenia de poner gerco a mx*^ y q sienpre estuviesen con mu- 
cho cuydado velandose y q si avia Algunos soldados que tu- 
viesen disposition para tomar Armas q se los Enbiase a tas- 
cala y q de alii no pasasen hasta estar los caminos mas seguros 
porque correrian rriesgo y despachados los mensageros y 
los tascaltecas puestos En su trra, volviose sandoVal para 
chalco q Era muy §erca de alii y con gran con§ierto sus 
corredores del canpo adelante porque bien Entendio q de to- 
dos aqllos pueblos y caserias por donde yva q avia de te- 
ner rrebato de mexicanos. E yendo por su camino gerca 
de chalco, vio venir muchos esquadrones mexicanos contra 
el y En vn canpo llano puesto q avia grandes labrangas de 
mayzales y magueys qs donde sacan El vino q Ellos beven 
le dieron vna buena rrefriega de bara y flecha y piedras con 
hondas y con langas largas para matar a los cavallos de ma- 
nera que sandoval desque vido tanto guerrero contra si, es- 
for§ando a los suyos rronpio por ellos dos vezes y con las 
escopetas y vallesteros y con pocos amigos q le abian qdado 
los desbarato, y puesto q le hirieron 9inco soldados y seys 
cavallos y muchos amigos, mas tal priesa les dio y con tanta 



492 

furia q le pagaron muy bien El mal q primero Abian hecho 
y como lo supieron los de chalco qstaba ^erca le salieron A 
rresgebir al sandoval al camino y le hi/ieron mucha honrra 
y fiesta, y En aqlla derrota se prendieron ocho mexicanos y 
los tres, personas muy prin9ipales, pues hecho Esto, otro dia 
dixo El sandoval que se queria bolver A tezcuco y los de 
chalco le dixeron que querian yr con el para ver y hablar 
A malinche y llebar consigo dos hijos del sefior de aquella 
provin§ia, q abia pocos dias q Era fallesgido de virhuelas, E 
que antes q muriese q abia Encomendado a todos sus pringi- 
pales E viejos q llevasen sus hijos para verse con el capiten 
y que por su mano fuesen senores de chalco, E q todos pro- 
curasen ser subjetos Al gran rrey de los tevles porq 5ierta- 
mente sus antepasados le avian dho q avian de sefiorear 
Aquellas trras honbres que vernian con barbasde a donde 
sale El sol, y q por las cosas q an visto, Eramos nosotros y 
luego se fue El sandoval con todo su Exer§ito a tezcuco y lie- 
bo En su conpafiia los hijos del sefior y los demas prin^ipa- 
les y los ocho prisioneros mexicanos, y desq cortes supo su 
venida se alegro En gran man era y despues de le aver dado 
cuenta el sandoval de su viaje y como venian Aquellos se- 
nores de chalco, se fue A su Aposento y los caciques fueron 
luego ante cortes, y despues de le Aver hecho gran Acato, le 
dixeron la voluntad que trayan de ser vasallos de su ma- 
gestad, segund y de la manera quel padre de aquellos dos 
mangebos, se lo avian mandado y para q por su mano los hi- 
ziese sefiores, y desq obieron dho su rrazonamiento, le pre- 
sentaron En Joyas rricas, obra de dozientos pesos de oro y 
desque El capitan Cortes lo ovo muy bien Entendido por 
nras lenguas dona marina y gr™® de aguilar les mostro mu- 
cho amor y les abrago y dio por su mano El senorio de chal- 
co Al hermano mayor con mas de la mitad de los pueblos 
sus subjetos y lo de tamanalco y chimaluacan dio Al herma- 
no menor conayozingo y otros pueblos subjetos y despues de 
aver pasado otras muchas rrazones de cortes A los prin§ipa- 
les viejos y con los cagiques nuevam*® Elegidos le dixero q 
se qrian volver A su trra y q En todo servirian a su mages- 



498 

tad y a nosotros En su rreal nonbre contra mexicanos E que 
Gon aquella voluntad avian estado sienpre E q por cavsa de 
las guarnigiones mexicanas q avian estado En su provingia 
no an venido antes de agora a dar la obidien5ia, y tanbien 
dieron nuevas a cortes q dos espanoles q abia Enbiado aqlla 
provin5ia por mayz antes q nos echasen de mx^ q porq los 
culuas no los matasen q los pusieron En salvo vna noche En 
lo de guaxozingo nros amigos y q alii salbaron las vidas lo 
qual ya lo sabiamos dias abia porq el vno de ellos era el q 
se fue a tascala y cortes se lo agradesgio mucho y le rrogo 
qsperasen Alii dos dias porq avian de Enbiar vn capitan por 
la madera y tablason A tascala y los Uebaria En su conpa- 
nya y los pornia En su trra porq los mexicanos no les sa- 
liesen al camino y ellos fueron muy contentos y se lo Agra- 
desgieron mucho. dexemos de hablar En esto y dire como 
cortes Acordo de ebiar A mx*^ aquellos ocho prisioneros q 
prendio El Sandoval En aqlla derrota de chalco a dezir al 
senor q Entonges Abian al§ado por rrey q se dezia guatemuz, 
q deseava mucho q no fuesen cavsa de su perdition ni de 
aqlla tan gran gibdad, y q viniesen de paz y q les perdona- 
ria las muertes y danos que En ella nos hizieron y q no se 
les demandaria cosa ninguna y q mirase q la guerra q a los 
prin§ipios son buenas de Enmendar y en los medios y fin 
diflcultosas y q al cabo se destruyrian y q bien sabian de las 
Albarradas E pertrechos y almazenes de varas y flechas, y 
langas, y macanas, y piedras rrollizas, y hondas y todos los 
generos de guerra q a la contina Estan haziendo y aparejan- 
do q para que Es gastar El tienpo En balde En hazello y q 
para q quiere q mueran todos los suyos y la gibdad se des- 
truya y q mire El gran poder de nro sefior dios qs En el q 
creEmos y Adoramos q El sienpre nos ayuda, E q tanbien 
q mire q todos los pueblos sus comarcanos tenemos de nro 
vando, pues los tascaltecas no desean sino la mesma guerra 
para vengarse de las traygiones y muertes de sus naturales q 
les an hecho y q dexen las armas y vengan de paz, y les pro- 
metio de les hazer sienpre mucha honrra, y les dixo dofia 
marina y aguilar otras muchas buenas rrazones y consejos 



494 

sobre El caso. y fueron antel guatemuz Aquellos ocho yn- 
dios nros mensageros, mas no quiso Enbiar rrespuesta nin- 
guna, sino hazer Albarradas y petrechos y Enbiar por todas 
sus provin^ias a mandar q si alguno de nosotros tomasen 
desmandados q se los truxesen A mx^ para sacrificar y q 
quando los Enbiase a llamar q luego viniesen con sus armas 
y les Enbio a quitar y perdonar muchos tributos y avn A 
prometer grandes promesas. dexemos de hablar En los ade- 
regos de guerra q En Mexico se hazian y digamos como bol- 
vieron otra vez muchos yndios de los 'pueblos de guautin- 
chon o guaxuntlandescalabrados de los mexicanos porq avian 
tornado nra amistad y por la contienda de los mayzales q so- 
lian senbrar para los papas mexicanos En el tienpo que les 
Servian como otras vezes E dho En el capitulo q dello habla 
y como estavan §erca de la laguna de mexico cada semana 
les venian a dar guerra y aun llebaron yiertos yndios presos 
a mx^ y desq aquello vio cortes, Acordo de yr otra vez por 
su persona, y con gient soldados y veynte de caballo y doze 
escopeteros y vallesteros, y tuvo buenas espias para quando 
sintiese venir los esquadrones mexicanos q se lo viniesen A 
dezir y como estava de tezcuco a vna o dos leguas ./ vn mier- 
coles por la mafiana amanessio A donde Estavan los esqua- 
drones mexicanos y peleo con ellos de manera q presto los 
rronpio y se metieron en la laguna En sus canoas y alii 
se mataron quatro mexicanos y se prendieron otros tres y se 
bolvio cortes con su gente A tezcuco y dende En adelante no 
vinieron mas los culuas sobre aqllos pueblos, y dexemos 
desto y digamos como cortes Enbio a gon§alo de sandoval a 
tascala por la madera y tablazon de los vergantines, y lo q 
mas En el camino hizo — 



TABLA DE CAPITULOS. 






TABLA DE CAPITULOS. 

NOTICIAS BIO-BIBLIOGRIFICAS. 

Pigs. 

Introduccion IX 

Bernal Diaz del Castillo. §I. — Su vida xix 

gll. — Su cardcter \ xlvi 

J III. — Su obra Lvm 

J IV. — Bibliografia lxix 

Ap^ndice ntimero 1 Lxxxv 

Id. ntimero 2. Tabla de variantes Lxxxix 

historia verdadera de la conquista de la nueva 

espaiRa. 

Preambulo 3 

Cap. i. Comien^a la irelagion de la ystoria 4 

Cap. n. como descubrimos la prouinyia de yucatan 10 

Cap. in. como seguimos la costa adelante hazia el poniente descubrien- 
do puntas y baxos y ancones y arre9ifes 13 

Cap. IV. de las guerras que alii nos dieron estando en las estan9ias y may- 
sales por mi ya dicbas 16 

Cap. v. como acordamos de nos bolver a la ysla de cuba, y de los gran- 
des trauaxos que tuuimos basta Uegar al puerto de la bauana 19 

Cap. VI. como desenbarcamos en la baya de la florida veynte soldados con 
el piloto alaminos a buscar agua, y de la guerra que alii nos dieron los 
naturales de aquella tierra, y de lo que mas paso basta bolver a la ba- 
vana 21 

Cap. VII. de los travajos que tube basta Uegar a vna uilla q se dize la tri- 
nidad 25 

Cap. vni. como diego Velasqz govemador de la ysla de cuba, ordeno de 
enbiar ^^la armada a las tierras que descubrimos, y fue por capitan ge- 
neral della vn bidalgo que se dezia Joan de grijalva pariente suyo y otros 
tres capitanes que adelante dire sus nonbres 27 

Cap. rx. como fiiemos la derrota segun y de la manera q lo auiamos tray- 

Bemal Diaz del Castillo.— 64. 



498 

PAgs. 

do quando lo do fran*" hemandez de cordoua, y fuymos a desenbarcar 

a chanpoton, y de la guerra que alii nos dieron y lo que mas auino 31 

Cap. X. como seguimos nro viaje y entramos en vn rrio muy ancho y gran- 
de que le pusimos boca de tenninoe, porq Enton9e8 le pusimos aql 
nonbre 33 

Cap. XI. como llegamos al rrio de tabasco, q llaman de gr^alva y lo q alii 
nos auino 34 

Cap. xn. como seguimos la costa adelante hazia donde se pone el sol, y 
llegamos al rrio que llaman de vanderas y lo que en el paso 37 

Cap. xni. como llegamos en el paraje del rrio de vanderas y de lo que 
alii se hizo 38 

Cap. XIV. como llegamos aquella ysleta, que agora se llama san joan de 
vlua E a que cavsa se le puso aquel nonbre y lo que alli pasamos 41 

Cap. XV. como diego Velazqz govemador de cuba, enuio vn nauio en nra 
busca, y lo que mas le sub^edio 48 

Cap. XVI. como fuimos descubriendo la costa adelante hasta la prouin9ia 
de panuco, y lo que pasamos hasta bolver a cuba 45 

Cap. xvn. como diego Velazqz enbio a espaiia para q su mg le diese li- 
Qen^ia para rrescatar y conquistar y poblar y rrepartir la tierra Desq 
estuuiese de paz 48 

Cap. xvin. de los borrones y cosas q escriuen los coronistas gomara E 
yllescas agerca de hw cosas de la nueva espana 50 

Cap. XIX. como venimos con otra armada a las tierras nueuas Descubier- 
tas y por capitan de la armada El valeroso y esforyado don hernando 
cortes, que despues el tienpo andando, fue marquez del valle, y de las 
oontrariedades que tuvo para le estoruar que no fuese CApitau 52 

Cap. XX. como cortes se aper9ibio y Entendio En las cosas q convenian 
para se despachar con el armada 55 

Cap. XXI. De lo que cortes hizo desque Uego a la uilla de la trinidad y de 
los soldadoa que de aquella villa salieron para yr En nra conpaflia y 
de lo que mas le auino 58 

Cap. xxu. como El govemador diego Velasquez Enbio En posta dos cria- 
' dos a la villa de la trinidad, con poderes y mandamientos para rrebo- 
car a cortes el poder y no dexar pasar el armada, y lo prendiesen y lo 
enbiasen a Santiago 60 

Cap. xxm. como El capitan hernando cortes se enbarco con todos los 
soldados para yr por la vanda del sur a la hauana, y enbio otro navio 
por la vanda del norte, y lo que mas le aconte^io 62 

Cap. XXIV. Como diego Velazquez Enbio a vn su criado, que se dezia gas- 
par de gamica Con mandamientos y provisiones, para que En todo 
caso se prendiese cortes, y se le tomase El armada, y lo que sobrello 
se hizo «)7 

Cap. XXV. Como cortes se hizo A la vela Con toda su conpaiia de Caba- 
Ueros y soldados para la ysla de Co^umel, y lo que alli le abino 69 

Cap. XXVI. Como cortes mando hazer alarde de todo El Exercito, y de 
lo que mas nos avinp 71 



499 

Cap. XXVII. Como C!orte8 supo de dos Espanoles questavan En poder de 
yndios En la punta de cotoche, y lo que sobrello se hizo 72 

Cap. xxAnn. Como cortes rrepartio los navios y seiialo Capitanes para yr 
En Ellos, y ansi mismo se dio la ynBtrugion de lo que avian de hazer a 
los pilotos y las sefiales de los faroles de noche y otras cosas que nos 
avino 76 

Cap. XXIX. Como El espanol questava en poder de yndios se llama va ge- 
ronimo de Aguilar supo Como Aviamos arribado A co^umel, y se vino 
A nosotros y lo que mas paso 78 

Cap. XXX. Como nos tomamos A Enbarcar y nos hizimos A la vela para 
El rrio de grijalva, y lo que noa avino En el viaje 81 

Cap. XXXI. Como Uegamos Al rrio de grijalba, q En lengua de yndios 
llaman tabasco, y de la guerra que nos dieron y io que mas con ellos 
pasamoB 84 

Cap. xxxn. Como mando oortes A dos capitanes q fuesen con cada ^ient 
soldadoe a ver la tierra dentro y lo q sobrello nos Acaescio 88 

Cap. xxxm. Como Cortes mando q para otro dia nos aparejasemos todos 
para yr En busca de los Esquadrones guerreros, y mando sacar los ca- 
vallos de los navios, y lo q mas nos abino En la batalla q con ellos tu- 
bimos 90 

Cap. xxxiv. Como nos dieron gerra e vna gran batalla todoe los Ca9ique6 
de tabasco y sus provingias, y lo que sobrello sub^edio 92 

Cap. xxxy. como enbio Cortes a Uamar todos los ca9iqueb de aquellas 
provin^ias y lo que sobrello se bizo 95 

Cap. xxxvi. Como vinieron todos los Ca9iques E calachonis del rrio de gri- 
jalba y truxeron vn presente, y lo que sobrello paso 98 

Cap. xxxvn. Como doHa marina Era CaQica, E hija de grandes senores, 
y seiiora de pueblos y vasallos y de la manera, que iue trayda A ta- 
vasco 108 

Cap. xxxvui. Como llegamos con todos los navios a san juan de vlua y lo 
que alii pasamos 105 

Cap. xxxix. Como foe tendile A hablar A su sefior montezuma, y Uevar 
El presente y lo q se hizo En nro rreal 110 

Cap. XL. Como Cortes Enbio A buscar otro puerto y asiento para poblar 
y lo que sobrello se hizo 113 

Cap. xu. de lo que se hizo sobre El rrescatar del oro, y de otras cosas que 
en el rreal pasaron 116 

Cap. XLn. Como al^amos a hemando cortes por capitan general, E justi- 
9ia mayor hasta q su magestad, En ello mandase lo q foese servido y 
lo que En ello sehizo 119 

Cap. xmi. Como la par9ialidad de diego velazqz perturbavan El poder que 
aviamos dado a Cortes y lo que sobrello sehizo 123^ 

Cap. xliv. Como foe acordado de Enbiar a pedro de alvarado la tierra 
adentro, A buscar mayz y bastimento, y lo que mas paso 124 

Cap. xlv. Como Entramos En ^enpoal, que En aquella sazon Era muy 

buena poblazon, y lo que alii pasamos 127 

Bemal Dlai del Castillo.— dS. 



600 

Cap. xlvi. Como Entramoe En quiaviztlan que Era puefolo puesto En for- 
taleza y nos Acogieron de paz 130 

Cap. XLvn. Como cortes mando q prendiesen AqueUos ^inoo rrecavdado- 
res de montezuma, y mando que desde Ay adelante, no le obedes9ie6en, 
ni diesen tributo y la rrebelion que enton9e8 se ordeno contra mon- 
tezuma 133 

Cap. xLvni. Como acordamos de poblar la villa rrica de la veracruz, y de 
hazer vna fortaleza, En vnos prados, junto a vnas salinas, y 9erca del 
puerto del nonbre feo donde Estavan anclados nros navios, y lo que 
alii se bizo 186 

Cap. xlix. Como vino El cacique gordo E otros prin^ipalee a quexarse 
a cortes como en vn pueblo fuerte que se dezia ^ingapa^inga estavan 
guami^iones de mexicanos y les bazian mucbo dafio, y lo que sobrello 
se bizo 139 

Cap. l. Como 9iertos soldados de la par9ialidad de di^o velazquez, vien- 
do que de becbo queriamos poblar y comen^amos a pa^iiicar pueblos, 
di xeronq no querian yr a ninguna Entrada, sino bolverse a la ysla 
de cuba 141 

Cap. LI. lo que nos acaesgio en gingapa^inga, y a la buelta q bolvimos por 
^enpoal les derrocamos sus ydolos y otras Cosas que pasaron 143 

Cap. Ln. Como cortes mando bazer vn altar y se puso vna ymagen de nra 
seiiora, y vna cruz, y se dixo misa y se bavtizaron las ocbo yndias 148 

Cap. Lni. Como boluimos a nra villa rrica, de la vera cruz, y lo q alii paso. . 151 

Cap. liv. de la rrela^ion E carta que Escrivimoe a su magestad, Con nros 
procuradores Alonso hernandez puerto Carrero, E fran^isco de monte- 
jo, la qual carta y va firmada de algunos capitanes y soldados 153 

Cap. lv. Como diego velazquez, governador de Cuba, supo- por Cartas 
muy de 9ierto q Enbiavamos procuradores. Con Enbajadas y presentes 
A nro rrey y seiior y lo q sobrello se bizo 157 

Cap. lvi. Como nros procuradores Con buen tienpo desEnbocaron, la ca- 
nal de babama, y En pocos dias llegaron A castilla, y lo que En la 
Corte les avino 169 

Cap. Lvn. Como despues que partieron nros Enbaxadores para su mg con 
todo El oro y cartas y rrelafiones lo q En el rreal se bizo, y la just* q 
cortes mando hazer 163 

Cap. lviii. como acordamos de yr a mexioo, y antes que partiesemos dar 
todos los navios Al trabez y lo que mas paso, y Esto de dar con los na- 
vios al trabes fue por consejo E acuerdo de todos nosotros los que Era- 
mos amigos de cortes 165 

Cap. ldc. De vn rrazonamiento que, Cortes nos bizo despues de aver dado 
con los navios al traves y [como] Aprestavamos nra yda para mexico. 167 

Cap. lx. Como cortes fue a donde Estava surto El navio y prendimos seys 
soldados y marineros, que del navio ovimos, y lo q sobrello paso 169 

Cap. lxi. como acordamos de yr a la 9ibdad de mexico, y por consejo del 
Cagique fuymos por tascala, y de lo que nos acaesgio, ' ansi de rren- 
cuentros de gerra como otras q nos avinieron 171 



501 

PAgs. 

Cap. Lxn. como se determino que fuesemos por tascala y les Enbiavamos 
mensageroB para que tuvieeen por bien nra yda por su tierra, y como 
prendieron a los mensageros y lo que mas se hizo 177 

Cap. Lxm. de laa guerras y batallas muy peligrosas, que tuvimos oon los 
tascaltecas, y de lo que mas paso 181 

Cap. lxiv. Ckmo tuvimos nro rreal asentado En vnos pueblos y caserias 
q se dize teoa^ingo o teva^inco y lo que alii hezimos 184 

Cap. lxv. de la gran batalla qovimos Con el poder de taxcalteca, y quiso 
dios nro senor damos vitoria, y lo que mas paso Es lo sigui* 186 

Cap. lxvi. Como otro dia Enbiamos mensageros A los Caciques de tascala 
rrogandoles con la paz y lo q sobrello hizieron 189 

Cap. Lxvn. Como tomamos A Enbiar mensageros A los CaQiques de tas- 
cala para q vengan de paz, y lo que sobrello, hizieron y acordaron 193 

Cap. Lxvra. Como Acordamos de yr a vn pueblo questava 9erca de nro 
rreal, y lo q sobrello se hizo 196 

Cap. lxix. Como desq bolvimos con cortes de 9inpan9ingo con bastimen- 
tos y hallamos en nro rreal ciertas platicas y lo q cortes rrespondio A 
eUas 198 

Cap. lxx. Como el capitan xicotenga tenia Aper9ebidos veynte mill gue- 
rreros Escogidos para dar En nro rreal, y lo q sobrello se hizo 203 

Cap. lxxi. Como vinieron a nro rreal los quatro prin9ipales q /kbian En- 
biado a tratar pazes, y el rrazonamiento q hizieron, y lo q mas 
paso 206 

Cap. Lxxn. Como vinieron a nro rreal Enbaj adores de montezuma gran 
senor de mexico, y del presenle que traxeron .*.... 208 

Cap. Lxxm. Como vitio xicotenga, capitan general de tascala, a entender 
en las pazes, y lo que dixo y lo que nos avino 210 

Cap. lxxiv. Como vinieron a nro rreal los Caciques viejos de tascala A 
rrogar A cortes y a todos nosotros, que luego nos fuesemos con ellos a 
su 9ibdad y lo q sobrello paso 214 

Cap. lxxv. Como fuymos a la yibdad de tascala, y lo* que los caciques vie- 
jos hizieron, de vn presente q nos dieron y como truxeron sus hijas y 
sobrinas y lo q mas paso • 217 

Cap. lxxvi. Como se dixo misa, Estando presentes muchos Caciques y de 
vn presente que truxeron los caciques viejos 220 

Cap. Lxxvn. Como truxeron las hijas A presentar A cortes, y a todos 
nosotros, y lo q sobre Ello se hizo 221 

Cap. Lxxvin. Como cortes pregiinto A mase EsCayi E a Xicotenga, por 
las cosas de mexico, y lo que En la rrela^ion dixeron 225 

Cap. lxxix. Como acordo nro Capitan hemando cortes, que todos nros 
capitanes y soldados, q fuesemos a mexico, y lo que sobrello paso 230 

Cap. lxxx. como El gran montezuma Enbio quatro prin9ipaie8 honbres 
de mucha cuenta con vn presente de oro y mantas, y lo q dixeron a 
nro capitan 238 

Cap. lxxxi. Como Enbiaron los de cholula quatro yndios de poca valia, 
a desculparse por no aver venido a tascala, y lo que sobrello paso 236 



502 

P4g«. 

Cap. Lxxxn. como fiiyinos a la gibdad de Cholula y del gran rrecibimien- 
to que no8 hisieron 237 

Cap. Lxxxm. Como tenian concertado En Esta yibdad de cholula, de nos 
matar, por mandado de monte^uma, y lo que sobrello paso 240 

Cap. Lxxxrv. de 9ierta8 platicas E mensajeros que Enbiamos al gran mon- 
te5uma 254 

Cap. lxxxv. Como el gran monte^uma Enbio vn presente de oro, y lo 
que Enbio a dezir y como acordamos de yr camino de mexico, y lo que 
mas Acae89io — sobre EUo 266 

Cap. lxxxvi. como comenyamos A caminar para la gibdad de mexico y 
En lo q En el camino noe avino, y lo que monteyuma Enbio a dezir... 259 

Cap. Lxxxvn. Como El gran monte9uma noe Enbio otroe enbaxadores, 
con vn presente de oro, y manias, y lo que dixeron a cortes y lo q lea 
rrespondio.. 268 

Cap. lxxxviii. del grande e solene rreedbimiento que noe hiao el gran 
monte^uma a cortex y a todos noeotros, en la entrada de la gran yibdad 
de mex* ; 268 

Cap. lxxxix. Como el gran monteyuma vino a nros aposentoe, con mu- 
chos cayiques que le aconpafiavan e la pratica que tuvo con nro capi- 
tan 272 

Cap. xc. como luego, otro dia, fiie nro capitan a ver al gran monte^uma 
y de 9iertaB praticas que tuvieron 274 

Cap. xci. de la manera, E persona del gran monteyuma, y de quan gran- 
de sefior hera 278 

Cap. xcu. como nro capitan salio a ver la yibdad de mex"^ y el tatelulco, 
ques la p]a9a mayor, y el gran Cu de su vichilobos, y lo que mas paso. 286 

Cap. xcm. como hizimos nra yglesia E altar En nro aposento y vna cruz 
fuera del aposento, y lo que mas pasamos, E hallamos la sala y rreca- 
mara del tesoro del padre del montezuma y de como se acordo prender 
almontezuma 297 

Cap. xciv. como fue la batalla que dieron los capitanes mexicanos a Juan 
descalante, y como le mataron a el e al cavallo y a seys soldados y A 
muchos amigos yndipi^ totonaques, q tanbien alii muriero 301 

Cap. xcv. de la prision del gran montezuma, y lo que sobrello sehizo... 304 

Cap. xcvi. Como nro cortes Enbio a la villa rrica por teniente y capitan 
a vn hidalgo que se d^zia Alonso de grado, en lugar del alguazil mayor 
juan descalante y el alguazilazgo mayor se lo dio a gon9alo de sando- 
val, y desde Entonyes fue alguazil mayor y lo que sobrello paso dire 
adelante 311 

Cap. xcvn. Como estando el gran montezuma preso, sienpre cortes y to- 
dos nros soldados le festejamos y rregoyijamos, y avn se le dio liQen9ia 
para yr a caga e fue esta li9* pa v' su yntenyion 814 

Cap. xcvm. como Cortes mando hazer dos vergantines de mucho soeten 
E veleros para andar en la laguna, y como el gran montezuma dixo a 
Cortes que le diese liyenyia para yr a hazer orayion a sus tenplos, y lo 
que Cortes le dixo y como le dio la liyenyia 318 



^3 

PAgs. 

Cap. xax. oomo Echamos loe dos yergantmes al ag^a y come el gran 
montezuma dixo que queria yr a ca^a y fiie en los vergantineB hasta 
vn peiiol donde avia muchoB benados y caga, que no Entrava a ca9ar 
en el persona ninguna, con grave pena : 821 

Cap. c. Como los sobrinos del gran montezuma andavan oonvocando e 
atrayendo a si las voluntades de otros sefiores para venir a mexico y 
sacar de la prision al gran montezuma y Echamos de la ^ibdad y ma- 
tarnos 828 

Cap. a. Como el gran montezuma, oon muchos ca9iques y pringipales de 
la comarca, dieron la obidien9ia a su magestad, y de otras oosas que 
sobre ello paso 880 

Cap. en. Como nro cortes procuro de saber de las minae del oro y de que 
calidad Eran, y ansi mismo En que rrios Estavan, y que puertos para 
navioB avia, desde lo de panuco, hasta lo de tavasco, Espeyialmente el 
rriogrande de guagaqualoo y lo quesobrello paso 883 

Cap. cm. como bolvieron los capitanes q nro cortes Enbio A ver las mi- 
nas Easondear El puerto y rrio de gua9aqualco 885 

Cap. civ. Como cortes dixo al gran montezuma, que mandase a todos loe 
cayiques de toda su tierra q tributasen a su m pues comunm** sabian 
q tenian oro, y lo q sobrello se hizo 339 

Cap. cv. Como se rrepartio El oro q ovimos, asi de lo q dio El gran mon- 
tezuma como lo q se rrecogio de los pueblos y de lo q sobrello acae69io 
a vn soldado 348 

Cap. cvi. Como ovieron palabras joan velazquez de leon y el tesorero gon- 
9alo mexia, sobre El oro que faltava de los montoaes, antes q se fun- 
diese, y lo q Cortes hizo sobre Ello 446 

Cap. cvn. Como el gran montezuma dixo a cortes que le queria dar vna 
hija de las suyas para que se casase Con ella, y lo que cortes le rres- 
pondio, y todavia la tomo y la Servian y honrravan como h^a de tal 
senor 348 

Cap. CYin. Como El gran montezuma dixo A nro Capitan cortes, que se 
saliese de mexico, con todos los soldados, porq se querian levantar to- 
dos los ca9iques y papas, y damos guerra, hasta matamos, porq ansi 
estava acordado, y dado Consejo por bus ydolos, y lo que Cortes sobre- 
llo hizo 850 

Cap. cix. Como diego velazquez, govemador de cuba, dio muy gran prie- 
sa En enbiar su armada contra nosotros, y en ella por Capitan general 
a panfilo de narvaez y como vino En su conpafiia El li9en9iado lucas 
Vazquez de ayllon oydor de la rreal avdien9ia de santo domingo, y lo 
que sobrello se hizo 854 

Cap. ex. Como panUlo de narvaez llego al puerto de san juan de vlua que 
se dize la veracruz, con toda su armada y lo que le su9edio 356 

Cap. CXI. Como panfillo de narvaez Enbio Con 9inco personas de su ar- 
mada a rreqrir a gon9alo de sandoval, questava por capitan En la villa 
rrica, que se diese luego con todos los vezinos y lo que sobrello paso... 859 

Cap. cxn. Como Cortes despues de bien ynformado de quien Era capitan, 

Benial Dlai del CastlUo.- 



504 

y quien y quantos venian en la armada, y los pertrechos de guerra q 
traya y de los tres nros falsos soldados que a narvaez se pasaron, escri- 
vio al capital! y a otros sua amigos espegialmente and res de duero, se- 
cretario del diego Velazquez, y tanbien supo Como montezunia enbiava 
oro y rropa al narvaez y las palabras q le enbio a dezir al montezu- 
ma y de como venia En aquella armada El lie*" lucas vasquesde ayllon, 
oydor de la avdien^ia rrealde santo domingo e la ynstru9ion q traya... 363 

Cap. cxin. Como ovieron palabras el capitan panfilo de narvaez y el 
oydor lucay vazquez de ayllon y el narvaez le mando prender y le En- 
bio En vn navio preso a cuba o a castilla y lo q sobre ello avino 366 

Cap. cxiv. como narvaez despues que ecbo preso al oyd"^ lucas vazquez de 
ayllon e a su escrivano, se paso con toda la armada a vn pueblo que 
se dize 9enpoal que en aquella sazon hera grande, y lo que en el oon- 
9erto y lo que nro Cortes y todos nosotros hezimos estando en mexico e 
como acordamos yr sobre narvaez 368 

Cap. cxv. como el gran mote^uma pregunta a cortes que como queria yr 
sobre narvaez siendo los que traya el narbaez muchos e cortes tbener 
pocos e que le pesaria sy nos viniese algun mal 371 

Cap. cxvi. como acordo Cortex con todos nros soldados que tomasemos 
a enbiar al rreal de narbaez al fraile de la merged que hera muy sagaz 
y de buenos medios y que se hiziese muy servidor del narbaez £ que se 
mostrase favorable a su parte mas que no a la de Cortez £ que secre- 
tamente conbocase al artillero que se dezia rrodrigo martin e a otro 
artillero que se dezia vsagre £ que hablase con andres de duero para 
que vyniese a berse con cortez e que otra cai-ta que escribiamos al nar- 
baez que mi rase que se la diese en sus manos £ lo que en tal casso con- 
benia e que tubiese mucha advertengia e para esto llebo muchantidad 
de texelos e cadenasde oro para rrepartir 377 

Cap. cxvii. como el fraile de la merged ftie a ^enpoal donde estaba el nar- 
baez e todos sus capitanes e lo que paso Con ellos e les dio la carta 380 

Cap. cxvni. Como en nro Real hezimos alarde de los soldados que era- 
mos e como traxeron dozientas e ^inquenta picas muy largas con dos 
hierros de cobre cada vna que cortez abia mandado hazer en vnos pue- 
blos que se dizen los chinantecas e nos inponyamos como abiamos de 
jugar dellas para derrocar la gente de a caballo que tenia narbaez y 
otras cosas queen el rreal pasaron 882 

Cap. cxrx. Como vino andres de duero a nro rreal y el soldado vsagre y 
dos yndios de Cuba naborias del duero, y quien Era £1 duero, y a lo 
que venia, y lo que tuvimos por 9ierto y lo que se Conyerto 884 

Cap. cxx. Como Uego Juan velazquez de leon e vn mogo despuelas de 
cortes q se dezia Joan del rrio, al rreal de narvaez, y lo que En el 
paso 887 

Cap. cxxi. de lo q se hizo En el rreal de narvaez, despues q de alii salie- 
ron nros Enbajadores 392 

Cap. cxxn. Del con^ierto y orden q se dio En nro Real para yr contra 
narvaez y del rrazonamiento q cortes nos hizo, y lo q le rrespondimos.. 894 



505 

P4g8. 

Cap. cxxiii. como despues de desbaratado narvaez segund y de la mane- 
ra que E dho, vinieron Iob yndios de chinanta q cortes abia Enbiado 
a Uamar, y de otras oofias q pasaron 405 

Cap. cxxiv. Como Cortes Enbio al puerto al Capitan fran** de lugo y en 
su Conpania dos soldados q avian sido maestres de navios, para q lue^ 
go truxesen alii a ^npoal todos los maestres y pilotos de los navios y 
flota de narvaez y que les sacasen las velas y timones e agugas, porque 
no fiiesen a dar mandado A la ysla de Cuba a diego velazquez de lo 
acaesgido, y como puso almirante de la mar, 'y otras Cosaa que pa- 
saron 406 

Cap. cxxy. Como fu3rmos A grandes Jomadas ansi cortes como todos sus 
Capitanes, y todos los de narvaez, Egeto panfilo de narvaez, y el sal- 
vatierraq qdavan presoe 411 

Cap. cxxyi. Como nos dieron guerra en mx^ y los Conbates q nos da van 
y otras cosas q pasamos 415 

Cap. cxxvn. desq fue muerto El gran montezuma, Acordo cortes de ha- 
zello saber A sus Capitanes y pringipales q nos davan guerra, y lo q 
mas sobrello paso 426 

Cap. cxxvm. Como Acordamos de nos yr huyendo de mexioo y lo que 
sobrello sehizo 427 

Cap. cxxix. Como fiiimos A la cabegera y mayor pueblo de tascala y lo 
q Alii pasamos  440 

Cap. cxxx. Como fiiymos a la provingia de tepeaca y lo que En ella hi- 
zimos y otras Cosas que pasaron 448 

Cap. cxxxi. como vino vn navio de Cuba que Enbiava diego velazquez £ 
venia En el por capitan pedro barba y la man era quel almirante q pu- 
so nro cortes por guarda de la mar tenia para los prender^ y es desta 
manera 453 

Cap. cxxxn. Como los yndios de guacachula vinieron a demandar fahor 
A cortes que los Exercitos mexicanos los tratavan mal y los rrobavan 
y lo q sobrello se hizo 455 

Cap. cxxxm. Como aporto al pefiol y puerto questa Junto a la billa rri- 
ca vn navio de los de fran** de garay, q avia Enbiado a poblar El rrio 
de panuco, y lo que sobrello mas paso 459 

Cap. cxxxrv. Como Enbio cortes a gongalo de sandoval a pagificar los 
pueblos de xalagingo E Qacatami y llevo dozientos soldados y veynte de 
cavallo y doze vallesteros y para q supiese q Espafioles mataron En 
ellos y q mirase q armas les avian tornado y q tierra Era y les manda- 
se El oro q rrobaron ; 463 

Cap. cxxxv. Como rrecogieron todas las mugeres y Esclavas y Esclavos 
de todo nro rreal q aviamos avido En aquello de tepeaca y cacbula y te- 
camachalco, y En castil bianco y en sus tierras para se herrar con el ye- 
rro q hizieron En nonbre de su magestad y de lo q sobrello paso 467 

Cap. cxxxvi. Como demandaron ligengia A cortes los capitanes y perso- 
nas mas pringipales de los q narvaez abia traydo En su conpaiiia para 
se bolver a la ysla de Cuba y cortes se la dio y se fueron y de como 



606 

despacho cortes Enbajadores para castilla y para santo domingo y xa- 
mayca y lo q sobre cada cosa Acae89io /... 470 

Cap. cxxxvn. C!omo caminamoB con todo nro Exer^ito camino de la ^ib- 
dad de tezcuoo y lo que £n el camino nos avino y otras cosas q pa- 
saron 476 

Cap. cxxxvin. Como fiiymoB A yzlApalapa con cortes y Uevo En su oon- 
pania a xpoual de oli y a p® de alvarado y qdo gon9alo de sandoval por 
guarda de tezcuco, y lo q noe Acaes^io En la toma de aquel pueblo y 
otrascosas q alii se hizieron 484 

Cap. cxxxix. oomo vinieron tres pueblos comarcanoe de tezcuco A de- 
mandar pazes y perdon de las guerras pasadas y muertes despafioles y 
los descargos q davan sobrello, y de como fiie gon9alo de sandoval A 
chalco y tamanaloo En su socorro contra mexicanos y lo q mas paso... 487 



FIN DEL TOMO L 



Pablicaciones de Oeuaro Garcia. 



CarIcTER de la CoNQUISTA EsPAffOLA EN Am^irica y 
EN MEXICO, segtin los textos delos historiadores primitivos. 

1 vol. en 89 $ 3 00 

Dos Antiguas Relaciones de la Florida (escrita una 
por Bartolom6 Barrientos en el siglo XVI y la otrji por fray 
Andr6s de San Miguel & principios del siglo XVII). 1 vol. 
en 4^ $ 6 00 

El Plan de Independencia de la Nueva EspaSTa en 
1808. Agotada, 

HiSTORIA VeRDADERA DE LA CONQUISTA DE LA NUEVA 

EsPAJfA escrita por Bernal Diaz del Castillo, uno de sus con- 
quistrtdores. XJnica edici6n hecha segtin el c6dice aut6grafo. 

2 vols, en 8^. Cada uno $4 50 

En la casa del autor. Librerfa de Ch. Bouret. 

23.— Donceles.— 23. 14.— Qnco de Mayo.— 14. 







I HAVE observed that the most celebrated chroniclers 
before they begin to write their histories, first set forth 
a prologue and preface with the argument expressed in 
lofty rhetoric in order to give lustre and repute to their 
statements, so that the studious readers who peruse them 
may partake of their melody and flavour. But I, being 
no Latin scholar, dare not venture on such a preamble or 
prolc^ue, for in order properly to extol the adventures 
which we met with and the heroic deeds we accomplished 
during the Conquest of New Spain and its provinces in 
the company of that valiant and doughty Captain, Don 
Hernando Cortes (who later on, on account of his heroic 
deeds, was made Marques del Valle^) there would be 
needed an eloquence and rhetoric far beyond my powers. 
That which I have myself seen and the fighting I have 
gone through, with the help of God I will describe, 
quite simply, as a fair eye witness without twisting events 
one way or another. I am now an old man, over eighty- 
four years of age, and I have lost my sight and hearing, 
and, as luck would have it, I have gained nothing of value 
to leave to my children and descendants, but this my true 

* Created Marques del Valle de Guajaca (Oaxaca) by the Emperor 
Charles V. The Cedula is dated Barcelona, 6th July, 1529. 

 PREFACE. 

Story, and they will presently find out what a wonderful 
story it is. 

I will do no more now than give evidence of my 
nationality and birthplace, and note the year in which 
I set out from Castille and the names of the captains in 
whose company I went as a soldier, and state where I am 
now settled and have my home. 



BOOK I.-THE DISCOVERY. 



THE EXPEDITION UNDER 
FRANCISCO HERNANDEZ DE CORDOVA, 



CHAPTER I. 

The beginning of the story. 

BERNAL DIAZ DEL CASTILLO, 
citizen and Regidor of the most loyal 
city of Santiago de Guatemala, one of 
the first discoverers and conquerors 
of New Spain and its provinces, and 
the Cape of Honduras and all that lies 
within that land, a Native of the very noble and dis- 
tinguished town of Medina del Campo, and the son of its 
former Regidor^ Francisco Diaz del Castillo, who was also 
called " The graceful," (may his soul rest in glory), speak 
about that which concerns myself and all the true con- 
querors my companions who served His Majesty by 
discovering, conquering, pacifying and settling most of the 
provinces of New Spain, and that it is one of the best 
countries yet discpvered in the New World, we found out 
by our own efforts without His Majesty knowing anything 
about it 



6 AN OUTLINE 

I also speak here in reply to all that has been said and 
written by persons who themselves knowing nothing, have 
received no true account from others of what really took 
place, but who nevertheless now put forward any state- 
ments that happen to suit their fancy. As there is no 
account of our many and remarkable services such as their 
merits deserve ******** these indifferent 
story-tellers are now unwilling that we should receive the 
recompense and * * » * * which His Majesty has 
ordered his Governors and Viceroys to afford us. 

Apart from these reasons such deeds as those I am 
going on to describe, cannot be forgotten, and the truth 
about them will be proved afresh, but, as in the books 
which have been written on the subject the truth has so 
often been perverted, [I write this history] so that when 
tales are told of daring deeds our fame shall not suffer, 
and that on account of such brilliant adventures our 
names may be placed among the most famous, for we 
have run the risk of death and wounds, and have suffered 
a thousand other miseries, venturing our lives in dis- 
covering lands about which nothing whatever was known, 
battling by day and by night with a host of doughty 
warriors, at so great a distance from Castille that no aid 
or assistance could reach us, save the only true help, 
namely the loving kindness of our Lord God whom it has 
pleased that we should conquer New Spain and the far- 
famed city of Tenochtitlan/ Mexico, for so it is called, 
and many other cities and provinces which are too 
numerous for me to name. As soon as we had the 
country pacified and settled by Spaniards, we thought 
it to be our duty as good and loyal subjects of His 
Majesty, with much respect for our King and natural 
Lord, to hand the country over to him. With that 

^ Tenuztitlan in the original. 



or THE STORY. 7 

intent we sent our Ambassadors to Castille and thence 
to Flanders where his Majesty at that time held his Court. 
I shall also tell about all the good results that came of it, 
and about the large number of souls which have been 
saved, and are daily being saved, by conversion to the 
faith, all of which souls were formerly lost in Hell. In 
addition to this holy work, attention will be called to the 
great treasure which we sent as a present to his Majesty, 
and that which has been sent and is being sent daily 
and is in the form of the Royal Fifths,* as well as in the 
large amounts carried off by many persons of all classes. 
I shall tell in this story who was the first discoverer of the 
province of Yucatan, and how we went to the discovery of 
New Spain and who were the Captains and soldiers who 
conquered and settled it and many other things which 
happened during the conquest, which are worth knowing 
and should not be forgotten ; all this I shall relate as 
briefly as possible, and above all with the assured truth of 
an eye witness. 

*If I were to remember and recount one by one the 
heroic [deeds] which we, one and all of us valiant captains 
and brave [soldiers] accomplished, from the beginning to 
the end of the conquest, reciting each deed as it deserved, 
it would, indeed, be a great [undertaking,] and would need 
a very famous historian [to carry it out] with greater 
eloquence and style than my poor words [can compass.] 
As later on « * « * when I was present and saw 
and understood, and I will call to mind * * * * that 
repeats m m m imposed as a duty — and delicate 
style and I * * « « I will write it with God's 

^ The tax on all bullion and other treasure paid to the Crown. 

* In the following passages many of the words of the Manuscript 
are rubbed and worn out When the meaning is obvious the missing 
words are supplied in brackets in the translation. When the meaning 
is not clear the spaces are maikcd with asterisks. 



8 AN OUTLINE 

help with honest truth ? ? * ? of the wise 
elders who say that a good style * ? * * is 
to tell the truth and * « « * [not] to exaggerate 
and flatter ? * ? « others, especially in a nar- 
rative like this * * * * would die of it, and 
because I am no latin scholar and do not understand 
the art ? * * * I will not treat of it, for I say I 
understand [only] the battles and pacifications where I 
was myself present, for I was one of the first [to set out] 
from Cuba in the company of a Captain named Francisco 
[Hernandez de Cordova] and we were accompanied on 
that voyage by one hundred and ten soldiers, we explored 
* * * ? they stopped (?) at the first place at 
which one landed which is called Cape [Catoche and at] a 
town further on called Chanpoton more than half of us 
[were killed and] the Captain received ten arrow wounds 
and all the rest of us soldiers got two [arrow wounds and 
the Indians] a[ttack]ing us with such skill we were obliged,, 
with the greatest difficulty to return to the Island [of 
Cuba whence] we had set out with the fleet, and the 
captain died almost as soon as we landed, and of the 
one hundred and ten soldiers who set out with us, fifty- 
seven were left behind, dead. 

After this first warlike expedition, I set out a second 
time from this same Island of Cuba under another captain, 
named Juan de Grijalva, and we again had great warlike 
encounters with these same Indians of the Pueblo of 
Chanpoton, and in this second battle many of our soldiers 
were killed. From that Pueblo we went on along the 
coast, exploring, until we arrived at New Spain and then 
kept on our way until we reached the province of Panuco. 
Then a second time we had to turn back to the Island 
of Cuba, baffled and exhausted both from hunger and 
thirst, and from other reasons which I will set forth in the 
chapter which treats of this expedition. 



OF THE StORY. 9 

To go back to my story ; I set out for the third time 
with the daring and valiant captain Don Hernando Cortes, 
who later on was made Marques del Valle and received 
other titles of honour. I repeat that no other captain or 
soldier went to New Spain three times in succession on 
one expedition after another as I did, so that I am the 
earliest discoverer and conqueror who has ever lived or is 
now living in New Spain. Although many soldiers went 
twice on voyages of discovery, the first time with Juan de 
Grijalva whom I have already mentioned, and the second 
time with the gallant captain Cortes, yet they never went 
three times in succession. If they went the first time with 
Francisco Hernandez de Cordova, they did not go the 
second time with Grijalva, nor the third time with the 
valiant Cortes. God has been pleased to preserve me 
through many risks of death, both during this laborious 
discovery, and in the very bloody Mexican wars (and I 
give God many thanks for it), in order that I may tell and 
declare the events that happened in those wars, so that 
studious readers may give them attention and thought. 

I was twenty-four years old when Diego Velasquez, the 
Governor of the Island of Cuba, who was my kinsman, 
promised to give me some Indians as soon as there were 
any available, but I did not care to be kept waiting until 
this should happen. I always had a zeal for soldiering, as 
• it is becoming that a man should have, both in order to 
serve God and the king and to endeavour to gain renown, 
and as being such a life that honourable men should seek, 
and I gradually put from my mind the death of my 
companions who were killed in those times and the wounds 
that I myself received, and the fatigue and hardship I 
endured and which all must endure who set out to discover 
new lands, and, being as we were, but a small company, 
dare to enter into great towns swarming with hostile 
warriors. I myself was always at the front and never 



» V -. 



10 THE AUTHOR SAILS FOR TIERRA-FIRME. 

descended to the many vices prevalent in the island of 
Cuba, as will be clearly seen in the course of this story. 

In the year fifteen hundred and fourteen, I came from 
Castille and began my career as a soldier on Tierra-firme,^ 
then went on to the discovery of Yucatan and New Spain, 
and as my forefathers, my father and my brother had 
always been servants of the crown and of the Catholic 
kings of glorious memory Don Fernando and Dofia Ysabel, 
I wished to be something like them. 

In the year 15 14, as I have already said, there came out 
as Governor of Tierra-firme, a gentleman named Pedrárias 
Dávila.* I agreed to go with him to his Government and 
the country conquered by him. So as to shorten the story, 
I will not relate what happened on the voyage, more than 
to say sometimes with good weather and other times with 
bad weather, we arrived at N ombre de Dios, for so it was 
named. 

Some three or four months after the settlement was 
formed, there came a pestilence from which many soldiers 
died, and in addition to this, all the rest of us fell ill and 
suffered from bad ulcers on the legs. Then disputes arose 
between the Governor and a nobleman named Vasco 
Nuflez de Balboa, the captain, who had conquered that 
province, to whom Pedrárias Dávila had given his daughter 
(Dofia somebody Arias de Pefialosa) in marriage. But it 
seems that after marriage, he grew suspicious of his son-in- 
law, believing that he would rise in rebellion and lead a 
body of soldiers towards the South Sea, so he gave orders 
that Balboa should have his throat cut and certain of the 
soldiers should be punished. 

As we were witnesses of what I have related, and of 
other revolts among the captains, and as the news reached 

* Tierra-firme = the Spanish Main. 
' Pedro Arias de Ávila. 



LEAVES TIERRA-FIRME FOR CUBA. It 

US that the Island of Cuba had lately been conquered and 
settled, and that a gentleman named Diego Velasquez, a 
native of Cuellar, who has already been mentioned by me, 
had been made Governor of the Island, some of us gentle- 
men and persons of quality, who had come out with 
Pedrárias Dávila, made up our minds to ask him to give 
us permission to go to Cuba, and he willingly did so, as he 
had no need of all the soldiers he had brought with him 
from Castille, as there was no one left to conquer. Indeed 
the country under his rule is small and thinly peopled, 
and his son-in-law Vasco Nunez de Balboa had already 
conquered it and ensured peace. 

As soon as leave was granted we embarked in a good 
ship and with fair weather reached the Island of Cuba. 
.On landing we went at once to pay our respects to the 
Governor, who was pleased at our coming, and promised 
to give us Indians as soon as there were any to spare. 

When three years had gone by, counting both the time 
we were in Tierra-iirme and that which we had passed in 
the Island of Cuba, and it became evident that we were 
merely wasting our time, one hundred and ten of us got 
together, most of us comrades who had come from Tierra- 
iirme, and the other Spaniards of Cuba who had had no 
Indians assigned to them, and we made an agreement with 
a gentleman named Francisco Hernandez de Cordova,^ 
whose name I have already mentioned, a rich man who 
owned an Indian Pueblo in the Island, that he should be 
our leader, for he was well fitted for the post, and that we 
should try our fortune in seeking and exploring new lands 
where we might find employment 

With this object in view, we purchased three ships, two 



^ The three partners in this expedition were Francisco Hernandez 
de Cordova, Lope Ochoa de Caicedo and Cristóval Morante. (See 
letter from the Municipality of Vera Cruz, dated loth July, 15 19. 
Usually known as Cortes' first letter.) 



12 PREPARATIONS FOR AN EXPEDITION 

of them of good capacity, and the third, a bark, bought on 
credit from the Governor, Diego Velasquez, on the con- 
dition that all of us soldiers should go in the three vessels 
to some islands lying between Cuba and Honduras, which 
are now called the Islands of the Guanajes,^ and make war 
on the natives and load the vessels with Indians, as slaves, 
with which to pay him for his bark. However, as we 
soldiers knew that what Diego Velasquez asked of us was 
not just, we answered that it was neither in accordancel 
with the law of God nor of the king, that we should make^ 
free men slaves. When he saw that we had made up/ 
our minds, he said that our plan to go and discover new 
countries was better than his, and he helped us in providing 
food for our voyage. Certain inquisitive gentlemen have 
asked me why I have written down these words which 
Diego Velasquez uttered about selling us the ship, and 
they say they have an ugly look and should not have been 
inserted in this history. I reply that I write them here 
because it is desirable on account of the law suits which 
Diego Velasquez and the Bishop of Burgos and Arch- 
bishop of Rosano, whose name is Juan Rodriguez de 
Fonscca, brought against us. 

To return to my story, we now found ourselves with 
three ships stored with Cassava* bread, which is made 
from a root, and we bought some pigs which cost three 
dollars apiece, for in those days there were neither sheep 
nor cattle in the Island of Cuba, for it was only beginning 
to be settled, and we added a supply of oil, and bought 
beads and other things of small value to be used for 
barter. We then sought out three pilots, of whom the 
chief, who took charge of the fleet, was called Anton de 
Alaminos a native of Palos, the second came from Triana 

^ Roatan, Bonacca, etc. Islands near the coast of Honduras. 
' Cassava bread. Made from the root of Manihoc utilissima. 



UNDER FRANCISCO HERNANDEZ DE CORDOVA. 1 3 

and was named Camacho, and the third was Juan Alvarez 
" el Manquillo "* from Huelva. We also engaged the 
necessary number of sailors and procured the best supply 
that we could afford of ropes, cordage, cables, and 
anchors, and casks for water and other things needed for 
the voyage, and this all to our own cost and regret. 

When all the soldiers were mustered, we set out for a 
port which in the Indian language is called Axaruco,* 
on the North coast, eight leagues from a town named 
San Cristobal, which was then inhabited and which two 
years later was moved to the present site of Havana. In 
order that our voyage should proceed on right principles 
we wished to take with us a priest named Alonso Gonzalez 
who was then living in the said town of San Cristobal, 
and he agreed to come with us. We also chose for the 
office of Veedor} (in his Majesty's name), a soldier named 
Bemaldino Yftiguez, a native of Santo Domingo de la 
Calzada, so that if God willed that we should come on 
rich lands, or people who possessed gold or silver or pearls 
or any other kind of treasure, there should be a responsible 
person to guard the Royal Fifth. 

After all was arranged and we had heard Mass, we 
commended ourselves to God our Lord, and to Our Lady, 
the sainted Virgin Mary, His blessed Mother, and set out 
on our voyage in the way I will now relate. 

^ El Manquillo » the little maimed or one-handed man. 

' Jaruco is shown on modem maps about twelve miles to the east 
of the present city of Havana. 

The name of Havana at this time appears to have applied to the 
district 

San Cristobal was on the south coast of the Island, which is here 
about eight leagues across from sea to sea. 

• Vcedor (obsolete)— overseer, caterer, official in charge of the 
stores. 



14 DISCOVERY OF YUCATAN. 

CHAPTER II. 

How we discovered the Province of Yucatan. 

On the eighth day of the month of February in the year 
fifteen hundred and seventeen, we left the Havana from 
the port of Axaruco, which is on the North coast, and in 
twelve days we doubled Cape San Antonio, which is also 
called in the Island of Cuba the land of the Guanaha- 
taveyes, who are Indians like savages. When we had 
passed this Cape we were in the open sea and trusting 
to luck we steered towards the setting sun, knowing 
nothing of the depth of water, nor of the currents, nor of 
the winds which usually prevail in that latitude, so we ran 
great risk of our lives, then a storm struck us which lasted 
two days and two nights, and raged with such streng^ 
that we were nearly lost. When the weather moderated, 
we kept on our course, and twenty-one days after leaving 
port, we sighted land, at which we rejoiced greatly and 
gave thanks to God. This land had never been discovered 
before and no report of it had reached us. From the 
ships we could see a large town standing back about two 
leagues from the coast, and as we had never seen such a 
large town in the Island of Cuba nor in Hispaniola, we 
named it the Great Cairo. 

We arranged that the two vessels which drew the least 
water should go in as near as possible to the Coast, to 
examine the land and see if there was an anchorage near 
the shore. On the morning of the 4th March, we saw ten 
large canoes, called piraguas^ full of Indians from the 
town, approaching us with oars and sails. The canoes 
were large ones made like hollow troughs cleverly cut out 
from huge single logs, and many of them would hold forty 
Indians. 

To go back to my story ; the Indians in the ten canoes 



CAPE CATOCHE. 15 

came close to our ships, and we made signs of peace to 
them, beckoning with our hands and waving our cloaks to 
induce them to come and speak to us, although at that 
time we had no interpreters who could speak the lan- 
guages of Yucatan and Mexico. They approached quite 
fearlessly and more than thirty of them came on board 
the flagship, and we gave them each a present of a string 
of green beads, and they passed some time examining the 
ships. The chief man among them, who was a Cacique, 
made signs to us that they wished ,to embark in their 
canoes and return to their town, and that they would 
come back again another day with more canoes in which 
we could go ashore. 

These Indians were clothed in cotton shirts made like 
jackets, and covered their persons with a narrow cloth 
which they call masteles, and they seemed to us a people 
superior to the Cubans, for the Cuban Indians go about 
naked, only the women wearing a cloth reaching to the 
thighs, which cloths they call naguas} 

To return to my story; the next morning the same 
Cacique returned to Ihe ships and brought twelve large 
canoes, which I have already said are czWed piraguas^ with 
Indian rowers, and with a cheerful face and every appear- 
ance of friendliness, made signs that we should go to his 
town, where they would feed us and supply all our needs, 
and that in those canoes of his we could land. 

He kept on saying in his language, ''cones cato€hé\ 
^ cones cato€he*\ which means "come to my houses", and 
for that reason we. called the land Cape Catoche, and it is 
still so named on the charts. 

When our captain and the soldiers saw the friendly 



^ Why the author should have written " que llaman naguas " is not 
dear. Énaguas or naguas is the Spanish, not the Cuban, word for the 
skirt, petticoat or upper skirt of a woman's dress. 



1 6 ATTACKED BY NATIVES. 

overtures the chief was making to us, we agreed to lower 
the boats from our ships, and in the vessel of least 
draught, and in the twelve canoes, to go ashore all 
together, and because we saw that the shore was crowded 
with Indians from the town, we arranged to land all of us 
at the same moment. When the Cacique saw us all on 
shore, but showing no intention of going to his town, he 
again made signs to our captain that we should go with 
him to his houses, and he showed such evidence of peace 
and good-will, that our captain asked our advice whether 
we should go on or no, and most of the soldiers were of 
opinion that with the precaution of taking all our arms 
with us we should go on, and we took with us fifteen 
crossbows and ten muskets, so with the Cacique as our 
guide, we began our march along the road, accompanied 
by many Indians. 

We moved on in this way until we approached some 
brush-covered hillocks, when the Cacique began to shout 
and call out to some squadrons of warriors who were lying 
in ambush ready to fall upon us and kill us. On hearing 
the Cacique's shouts, the warriors attacked us in great 
haste and fury, and began to shoot with such skill that the 
first flight of arrows wounded fifteen soldiers. 

These warriors wore armour made of cotton reaching to 
the knees and carried lances and shields, bows and arrows, 
slings and many stones. 

After the flight of arrows, the warriors, with their 
feathered crests waving, attacked us hand to hand, and 
hurling their lances with all their might they did us much 
damage. However, thank God, we soon put them to 
flight when they felt the sharp edge of our swords, and 
the effect of our guns and crossbows, and fifteen of them 
fell dead. 

A short distance ahead of the place where they attacked 
us, was a small plaza with three houses built of masonry, 






INDIAN PRISONERS. I/ 

which served as Cues^ and oratories.* These houses con- 
tained many pottery Idols, some with the faces of demons 
and others with women's faces, and there were others of 
evil figures of Indians who appeared to be committing 
sodomy one with another. 

Within the houses were some small wooden chests, and 
in them were some other Idols, and some little discs made 
partly of gold but more than half of copper, and some 
necklaces and three diadems, and other small objects in 
the form of fish and others like the ducks of the country, 
all made of inferior gold. 

When we had seen the gold and the houses of masonry, ^^ i 

we felt well content at having discovered such a country, / < 
for at that time Peru was unknown, indeed, it was not 
discovered until twenty years later. 

While we were fighting with the Indians, the priest 
Gonzalez had accompanied us, and he took charge of the 
chests and the gold, and the Idols, and carried them to 
the ship. In these skirmishes we took two Indians 
prisoners, and later on, when they were baptized, one was 
named Julian and the other Melchior, both of them were 
cross-eyed. When the fight was over we returned to our 
ships, and went on exploring along the coast towards the 
setting sun, we set sail as soon as the wounded were cared 
for, and what else happened I will tell later on. 



^ Cue is the name commonly applied to the Indian shrines or 
Itemples, usually small buildings raised on pyramidal foundations. It 
IS not a Maya or Mexican word, but one picked up by the Spaniards 
|n the Antilles. 

• It should be noted that, although the Spaniards had now been in 
America for twenty-four years and had explored the Islands and the 
coast of the mainland from the mouth of the Orinoco to the Bay 
of Honduras, and part of the coast of Florida, this was the first time 
they had seen houses and temples built of stone ; and with the 
exception of the crew of a canoe which Columbus met during his 
fourth voyage near the Islands of the Guanajes off the coast of Hon- 
duras, this was the first meeting of the Spaniards with any of the more 
civilised races of America. 



1 8 SPANIARDS LAND AT CAMPECHE. 



CHAPTER III. 

How we coasted along towards the west, discovering capes and 
deep water, roadsteads and reefs. 

Believing this land to be an Island, as the Pilot, Anton 
de A [aminos, had assured us that it was, we travelled with 
the greatest caution, sailing only by day and anchoring by 
night. After voyaging in this manner for fifteen days, we 
descried from the ship, what appeared to be a large town 
near to a great bay or creek, and we thought that there 
might be a river or stream there, where we could pro- 
vide ourselves with water of which we had great need, 
because the casks and other vessels which we had brought 
with us, were not watertight. It was because our fleet was 
manned by poor men who had not money enough to 
purchase good casks and cables, that the water ran short. 
We had to land near the town, and as it was Sunday, the 
day of San Lázaro, we gave the town that name, and so it 
is marked on the charts, but its proper Indian name is 
Campeche. 

In order that we could all of us land at the same time, 
we agreed to approach the shore in the smallest of the 
vessels, and in the three boats, with all our arms ready, so 
as not to be caught as we had been at Cape Catoche. 

In these roadsteads and bays, the water shallows very 
considerably at low tide, so that we had to leave our ships 
anchored more than a league from the shore. 

We went ashore near the town where there was a pool 
of good water, used by the people of the place for drinking 
water, for as far as we had seen there were no rivers in this 
country. We landed the casks, intending to fill them with 
water, and return to our ships. When the casks were full, 
and we were ready to embark, a company of about fifty 
Indians, clad in good cotton mantles, came out in a peace- 



STONE-BUILT TEMPLES. I9 

ful manner from the town. From their appearance we 
believed them to be Caciques, and they asked us by signs 
what it was we were looking for, and we gave them to 
understand that we had come for water, and wished to 
return at once to our ships. They then made signs with 
their hands to find out whether we came from the direction 
of the sunrise, repeating the word " Castilan " " Castilan " 
and we did not understand what they meant by Castilan, 
They then asked us by signs to go with them to their 
town, and we took council together as to what we should 
do, and decided to go with them, keeping well on the alert 
and in good formation. 

They led us to some large houses very well built of 
masonry, which were the Temples of their Idols, and on 
the walls were figured the bodies of many great serpents 
and snakes and other pictures of evil-looking Idols. These 
walls surrounded a sort of Altar covered with clotted 
blood. On the other side of the Idols were symbols like 
crosses, and all were coloured. At all this we stood 
wondering, as they were things never seen or heard of 
before. 

It seemed as though certain Indians had just offered 
sacrifices to their Idols so as to ensure victory over us. 
However, many Indian women moved about us, laughing, 
and with every appearance of good will, but the Indians 
gathered in such numbers that we began to fear that 
there might be some trap set for us as at Catoche. While 
this was happening, many other Indians approached us, 
wearing very ragged mantles and carrying dry reeds, 
which they deposited upon the plain, and behind them 
came two squadrons of Indian archers in cotton armour, 
carrying lances and shields, slings and stones, and each 
captain drew up his squadron at a short distance from 
where we stood. At that moment, there sallied from 
another house, which was an oratory of their Idols, ten 

C 2 



20 THE RETURN TO THE SHIPS. 

Indians clad in long white cotton cloaks, reaching to their 
feet, and with their long hair reeking with blood, and so 
matted together, that it could never be parted or even 
combed out again, unless it were cut. These were the 
priests of the Idols, who in New Spain are commonly 
cMed ?a?as and such I shall call them hereafter. These 
priests brought us incense of a sort of resin which they 
call cofia/, and with pottery braziers full of live coals, they 
began to fumigate us, and by signs they made us under- 
stand that we should quit their land before the firewood 
which they had piled up there should burn out, otherwise 
they would attack us and kill us. After ordering fire to 
be put to the reeds, the priests withdrew without further 
speech. Then the warriors who were drawn up in battle 
array began to whistle and sound their trumpets and 
drums. When we perceived their menacing appearance 
and saw great squadrons of Indians bearing down on us 
we remembered that we had not yet recovered from the 
wounds received at Cape Catoche, and had been obliged 
to throw overboard the bodies of two soldiers who had 
died, and fear fell on us, so we determined to retreat to 
the coast in good order, and began to march along the 
shore towards a large rock which rose out of the sea, 
while the boats and the small bark laden with the water 
casks coasted along close in shore. We had not dared to 
embark near the town where we had landed, on account of 
the great press of Indians, for we felt sure they would 
attack us as we tried to get in the boats. As soon as we 
had embarked and got the casks on board the ships, we 
sailed on for six days and nights in good weather, then we 
were struck by a norther which is a foul wind on that 
coast and it lasted four days and nights, and so strong was 
the storm that it nearly drove us ashore, so that we had to 
drop anchor, but we broke two cables, and one ship began 
to drag her anchor. Ah ! the danger was terrible, for if 



SPANIARDS LAND AT CHANPOTON. 2Í 

our last cable had given way we should have been driven 
ashore to destruction, but thank God we were able to ease 
the strain on the cable by lashing it with pieces of rope 
and hawsers, and at last the weather moderated. Then 
we kept on our course along the coast, going ashore 
whenever we were able to do so to get water, for, as I have 
already said, the casks we carried were not only leaky, but 
were gaping open, and we could not depend upon them, 
and we hoped that by keeping near the coast we should be 
able to find water, whenever we landed, either in pools or 
by digging for it. 

As we were sailing along on our course, we came in 
sight of a town, and about a league on the near side of it, 
there was a bay which looked as though it had a river or 
stream running into it ; so we determined to anchor. On 
this coast the tide runs out so far that there is danger of 
the ships being stranded, so for fear of this we dropped 
anchor at the distance of a league from the shore, and we 
landed in that bay from the vessel of least draught and 
from the boats, carrying all our casks along with us to fill 
them with water. We landed soon after mid-day, well 
armed with crossbows and guns. This landing place was 
about a league from the town, near to some pools of 
water, and maize plantations, and a few small houses 
built of masonry. The town is called Potonchan.^ 



^ This town is called both Potonchan and Chanpoton by Bernal 
Diaz, and Chanpoton in the " Itinirario" and in the Letter from the 
Municipality of Vera Cruz to Chas. V. In modem maps it is called 
Champoton. There is a further difficulty about the name of this 
town, because the town at the mouth of the Rio de Grijalva (Sta. 
Maria de la Victoria) was also called Potonchon or Potonchan. In 
the "Relacion de la Villa de Santa Maria de la Victoria" (i 579), printed 
in the Documentos Ineditos, Relaciones de Yucatan (Madrid, 1898) 
we find : " This province is called the province of Tabasco, because 
the Lord of this town was called Tabasco, and the name of the town 
is Potonchan, which in Spanish means the Chontal tongue, almost as 
though we should say the barbarous tongue, for Chontal in the Mexican 
language is the same as barbarous, and so this town is called Poton- 
chan, as that is the language generally used in this province ; and as 



á2 INDIAN WARRIORS ASSEMBLE. 

We filled our casks with water, but we could not carry 
them away on account of the great number of warriors 
who fell on us. I will stop now and tell later on about 
the attack they made on us. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Concerning the attack made on us as we stood among the 
farms and maize fields already mentioned. 

As we were filling our casks with water there came 
along the coast towards us from the town of Potonchan^ 
(as it is called) many squadrons of Indians clad in cotton 
armour reaching to the knees, and armed with bows and 
arrows, lances and shields, and swords like two handed 
broad swords, and slings and stones and carrying the 
feathered crests which they are accustomed to wear. 
Their faces were painted black and white, and ruddled 
and they came in silence straight towards us, as though 
they came in peace, and by signs they asked whether we 
came from where the sun rose, and we replied that we 
did come from the direction of the sunrise. We were at 
our wits end considering the matter and wondering what 
the words were which the Indians called out to us for 
they were the same as those used by the people of Lázaro, 
but we never made out what it was that they said. 

the Lord of this town was called Tabasco the province is called 
Tabasco." 

Santa Maria de la Victoria appears to have lost both its original 
native and its Spanish name, and soon became known as the town of 
Tabasco, and is so marked on the map of Melchor de Santa Cruz 
(1579) ; not long afterwards the town itself disappeared. 

Chanpoton has retained its name, and when Bernal Diaz mentions 
Chanpoton or Potonchan he invariably intends to indicate the site of 
the modem Champoton, between Campeche and the Laguna de 
Términos, the "Costa de Mala Pelea" of the expedition under 
Francisco Hernandez de Cordova. 

* Here written Pontuchan in the original text = Chanpoton. 



Series II. Vol. XXIII. 





~ ,W ('H > » 1 > 

On o # 















5f» 



Par/ o/ a Mural Painting of a 

BATTLE FROM THE BALL COURT TEMPLE CHICHEN ITZA, YUCATAN. 

After a drawing by Miss Adda Breton. 

Reproduced and printed for tin.' Haklayt Society bv Donald Macbeth, 1908. 

Plate 2. To face page 22. 



CONFLICTING COUNSELS. 2Í 

All this happened about the time of the Ave Maria, 
and the Indians then went ofif to some villages in the 
neighbourhood, and we posted watchmen and sentinels 
for security, for we did not like such a large gathering 
of Indians. 

While we were keeping watch during the night we 
heard a great squadron of Indian warriors approaching 
from the town and from the farms, and we knew well that 
their assembly boded us no good, and we took council 
together as to what should be done. Some of the soldiers 
were of opinion that we should embark without delay ; 
however as always happens in such cases, some said one 
thing and some said another, but the Indians being in 
such numbers it seemed to most of my companions that 
if we made any attempt to embark they would be sure 
to attack us, and we should run great risk of losing our 
lives. Some others were of opinion that we should fall 
upon the Indians that very night, for, as the proverb 
says " who attacks conquers ". On the other hand we 
could see that there were about two hundred Indians to 
every one of us. While we were still taking council the 
dawn broke, and we said one to the other " let us 
strengthen our hearts for the fight, and after commend- 
ing ourselves to God let us do our best to save our 
lives." 

As soon as it was daylight we could see, coming along 
the coast, many more Indian warriors with their banners 
raised, and with feathered crests and drums, and they 
joined those warriors who had assembled the night 
before. When their squadrons were formed up they 
surrounded us on all sides and poured in such showers 
of arrows and darts, and stones thrown from their slings 
that over eighty of us soldiers were wounded, and they 
attacked us hand to hand, some with lances and the 
others shooting arrows, and others with two-handed 



á4 DEFEAT OF THE SPANIARDS. 

knife edged swords,^ and they brought us to a bad pass. 
We gave them a good return of thrusts and cuts and the 
guns and crossbows never ceased their work, some being 
loaded while the others were fired. At last feeling the 
effects of our sword. play they drew back a little, but 
it was not far, and only enabled them to shoot their 
stones and darts at us with greater safety to them- 
selves. 

While the battle was raging the Indians called to one 
another in their language "a/ Calachuni^ CalachunV^ which 
means " let us attack the Captain and kill him," and ten 
times they wounded him with their arrows ; and me they 
struck thrice, one arrow wounding me dangerously in the 
left side, piercing through the ribs. All the other soldiers 
were wounded by spear thrusts and two of them were 
carried off alive, one named Alonzo Boto, and the other 
an old Portuguese man. 

Our captain then saw that our good fighting availed us 
nothing ; other squadrons of warriors were approaching 
us fresh from the town, bringing food and drink with them 
and a large supply of arrows. All our soldiers were 
wounded with two or three arrow wounds, three of them 
had their throats pierced by lance thrusts, our captain was 
bleeding from many wounds and already fifty of the 
soldiers were lying dead. 

Feeling that our strength was exhausted we determined 
with stout hearts to break through the battalions sur- 
rounding us and seek shelter in the boats which awaited 
us near the shore, and proved to be a great assistance to 
us ; so we formed in close array and broke through the 
enemy. 

Ah ! then to hear the yells, hisses and cries, as the 



^ Macana or Macnahuitl^ a wooden sword edged with sharp flint 
or obsidian. 



THE RETREAT TO THE SHIPS. 25 

enemy showered arrows on us and hurled lances with all 
their might, wounding us sorely. 

Then another danger befell us ; as we all sought shelter 
in the boats at the same time and there were so many 
of us they began to sink, so in the best way we could 
manage hanging on to the waterlogged boats and half 
swimming, we reached the vessel of lightest draught which 
came in all haste to our assistance. 

Many of us were wounded while we embarked, especially 
those who were sitting in the stern of the boats, for the 
Indians shot at them as targets, and even waded into the 
sea with their lances and attacked us with all their strength. 
Thank God ! by a great effort we escaped with our lives 
from the clutches of those people. 

When we got on board the ships we found that over 
fifty of our soldiers were missing, among them two who 
had been carried off alive. Within a few days we had to 
cast into the sea five others who died of their wounds 
and of the great thirst which we suffered. The whole of 
the fighting occupied only one hour. 

The place is called Potonchan,^ but the pilots and 
sailors have marked it on the chart as the "Costa de 
Mala Pelea" (the coast of the disastrous battle). When 
we were safely out of that affray we gave hearty thanks 
to God. 

As the wounds of the soldiers were being dressed, some 
of them complained of the pain they felt, for they began 
to be chilled and the salt water caused considerable 
swelling, and some of them began to curse the pilot Anton 
de Alaminos and his voyage and discovery of the Island, 
for he always maintained that it was an Island and not 
the main land. 

Here I must leave off and I will tell what happened 
to us later on. 



^ Chanpotoii. 



26 THE RETURN VOYAGE. 



CHAPTER V. 

How we agreed to return to the Island of Cuba and of the great 
hardships we endured before arriving at the Port of Havana. 

As soon as we got on board ship again, in the way I 
have related, we gave thanks to God, and after we had 
attended to the wounded (and there was not a man among 
us who had not two, three or four wounds, and the Captain 
was wounded in ten places and only one soldier escaped 
without hurt) we decided to return to Cuba. 

As almost all the sailors also were wounded we were 
shorthanded for tending the sails, so we abandoned the 
smallest vessel and set fire to her after removing the sails, 
cables and anchors, and we divided the sailors who were 
unwounded between the two larger vessels. However, 
our greatest trouble arose from the want of fresh water, 
for owing to the attack made on us at Chanpoton, and 
the haste with which we had to take to the boats, we 
could not carry away with us the casks and barrels 
which we had filled with water, and they were all left 
behind. 

So great was our thirst that our mouths and tongues 
were cracked with the dryness, and there was nothing to 
give us relief. Oh ! what hardshipá one endures, when 
discovering new lands, in the way we set out to do it ; no 
one can appreciate the excessive hardships who has not 
passed through them as we did. 

We kept our course close to the land in hope of finding 
some stream or bay where we could get fresh water, and 
at the end of three days we found a bay where there ~ 
appeared to be a river or creek which we thought might 
hold fresh water. Fifteen of the sailors who had remained 
on board and were unwounded and three soldiers who 
were out of danger from their wounds went ashore, and 



ALAMINOS STEERS FOR FLORIDA. 27 

they took hoes with them, and some barrels to fill with 
water ; but the water of the creek was salt, so they dug 
holes on the beach, but there also the water was as salt 
and bitter as that in the creek. However, bad as the 
water was, they filled the casks with it and brought it 
on board, but no one could drink such water and it did 
harm to the mouths and bodies of the few soldiers who 
attempted to drink it. 

There were so many large alligators in that creek that 
it has always been known as the estero de los Lagartos and 
so it is marked on the charts. 

While the boats went ashore for water there arose such 
a violent gale from the North East that the ships began to 
drag their anchors and drift towards the shore, for on that 
coast contrary winds prevail from the North or North East. 
When the sailors who had gone on shore saw what the 
weather was like they returned with the boats in hot 
haste and arrived in time to put out other anchors and 
cables, so that the ships rode in safety for two days and 
nigh*ts. Then we got up anchor and set sail continuing 
our voyage back to the island of Cuba. 

The pilot Alaminos then took council with the other two 
pilots, and it was settled that from the place we then were 
we should cross over to Florida, for he judged from his 
charts and observations that it was about seventy leagues 
distant, and that having arrived in Florida they said that 
it would be an easier voyage and shorter course to reach 
Havana than the course by which we had come. 

We did as the pilot advise.d, for it seems that he had 
accompanied Juan Ponce de Leon on his voyage of 
discovery to Florida fourteen or fifteen years earlier,^ 
when in that same land Juan Ponce was defeated and 



* Juan Ponce de Leon discovered Florida on Easter Sunday 
(Pascua Florida), 27th March, 15 13. 



28 THE SPANIARDS LAND IN FLORIDA. 

killed. After four days' sail we came in sight of the 
land of Florida, and what happened to us there I will 
tell next. 



CHAPTER VI. 



How twenty- of us soldiers went ashore in the Bay of Florida, in 
company with the Pilot Alaminos, to look for water, and the 
attack that the natives of the land made on us, and what else 
happened before we returned to Havana. 

When we reached Florida it was arranged that twenty 
of the soldiers, those whose wounds were best healed, 
should go ashore. I went with them, and also the Pilot, 
Anton de Alaminos, and we carried with us such vessels 
> as we still possessed, and hoes, and our crossbows and 
guns. As the Captain was very badly wounded, and 
much weakened by the great thirst he had endured, he 
prayed us on no account to fail in bringing back fresh 
water as he was parching and dying of thirst, for, as I 
have already said, the water we had on board was salt 
and not fit to drink. 

We landed near a creek which opened towards the sea, 
and the Pilot Alaminos carefully examined the coast and 
said that ,he had been at this very spot when he came 
on a voyage of discovery with Juan Ponce de Leon and 
that the Indians of the country had attacked them and 
had killed many soldiers, and that it behoved us to keep 
a very sharp look out. We at once posted two soldiers 
as sentinels while we dug deep holes on a broad beach 
where we thought we should find fresh water, for at that 
hour the tide had ebbed. It pleased God that we should 
come on very good water, and so overjoyed were we that 
what with satiating our thirst, and washing out cloths with 
which to bind up wounds, we must have stayed there an 
hour. When, at last, very well satisfied, we wished to go 



SKIRMISH WITH THE NATIVES. 29 

on board with the water, we saw one of the soldiers whom 
we had placed on guard coming towards us crying out, 
" to arms, to arms ! many Indian warriors are coming on 
foot and others down the creek in canoes." The soldier 
who came shouting, and the Indians reached us nearly at 
the same time. 

These Indians carried very long bows and good arrows 
and lances, and some weapons like swords, and they were 
clad in deerskins and were very big men. They came 
straight on and let fly their arrows and at once wounded 
six of us, and to me they dealt a slight arrow wound. 
However, we fell on them with such rapidity of cut and 
thrust of sword and so plied the crossbows and guns that 
they left us to ourselves and set off" to the sea and the 
creek to help their companions who had come in the 
canoes and were fighting hand to hand with the sailors, 
whose boat was already captured and was being towed 
by the canoes up the creek, four of the sailors being 
wounded, and the Pilot Alaminos badly hurt in the 
throat. Then we fell upon them, with the water above 
our waists, and at the point of the sword, we made 
them abandon the boat. Twenty of the Indians lay 
dead on the shore or in the water, and three who were 
slightly wounded we took prisoners, but they died on 
board ship. 

As soon as the skirmish was over we asked the soldier 
who had been placed on guard what had become of his 
companion Berrio (for so he was named). He replied 
that he had seen him go off with an axe in his hand to 
cut down a small palm tree, and that he went towards 
the creek, whence the Indian warriors had approached 
us, that he then heard cries in Spanish, and on that 
account he had hurried towards us to give us warning, 
and it was then that his companion must have been 
killed. 



30 SET SAIL FOR HAVANA. 

The soldier who had disappeared was the only man 
who had escaped unwounded from the fight at Poton- 
chan^ and it was his fate to come on here to die. We 
at once set to work to search for our soldier along the 
trail made by the Indians who had attacked us. We 
found a palm tree partly cut through, and near by the 
ground was much trampled by footsteps more than in 
other parts, and as there was no trace of blood we took it 
for certain that they had carried him off alive. We 
searched and shouted all round about for more than an 
hour, but finding no trace of him we got into the boats 
and carried the fresh water to the ship, at which the 
soldiers were as overjoyed as though we had given them 
their lives. One soldier jumped from the ship into the 
boat, so great was his thirst, and clasping a jar of water 
to his chest drank so much water that he swelled up and 
died within two days. 

As soon as we had got the water on board and had 
hauled up the boats, we set sail for Havana, and during 
the next day and night the weather was fair and we were 
near some Islands called Los Martires among the shoals 
called the shoals of the Martyrs. Our deepest soundings 
gave four fathoms, and the flagship struck the ground 
when going between the Islands and made water fast, and 
with all of us soldiers working at the pumps we were 
not able to check it, and we were in fear of foundering. 

We had some Levantine sailors on board with us, and 
we called to them, " Comrades, come and help to work the 
pump, for you can see that we are all badly wounded and 
weary from working day and night." And the Levantines 
answered, " Do it yourselves, for we do not get any pay as 
you do, but only hunger and thirst, toil and wounds." So 
then we made them help us with the work. 

^ Chanpoton. 



DEATH OF FRANCISCO HERNANDEZ DE CORDOVA. 3 1 

111 and wounded as we were we managed to trim the 
sails and work the pump until our Lord carried us into 
the Port of Carenas/ where now stands the city of 
Havana, but it used to be called Puerto de Carenas, and 
when we got to land we gave thanks to God. 

I must remember to say that when we got to Havana, a 
Portuguese diver who happened to be in that port soon 
got the water out of the flagship. 

We wrote in great haste to the Governor of the Island, 
Diego Velasquez, telling him that we had discovered 
thickly - peopled countries, with masonry houses, and 
people who covered their persons and went about clothed 
in cotton garments, and who possessed gold and who 
cultivated maize fields, and other matters which I have 
forgotten. 

From Havana our Captain Francisco Hernandez went 
by land to the town of Santispiritus, for so it is called, of 
which he was a citizen, and where he had his Indians ; 
but he was so badly wounded that he died within ten 
days. 

Three soldiers died of their wounds in Havana, and all 
the rest of us dispersed and went some to one and some 
to other parts of the Island. The ships went on to 
Santiago where the Governor was living, and the two 
Indians whom we captured at Cape Catoche, whom we 
named Melchorejo and Julianillo were sent on shore, as 
were also the little chest with the diadems and the ducks 
and little fish and other articles of gold and the many 
idols. These showed such skilful workmanship that the 
fame of them travelled throughout the Islands including 
Santo Domingo and Jamaica and even reached Spain. It 
was said that better lands had never been discovered in the 
world ; and when the pottery idols with so many different 

* The Havana of to-day. 



32 THE EXPEDITION DISPERSES. 

shapes were seen, it was said that they belonged to the 
Gentiles, and others said that they were the work of the 
Jews whom Titus and Vespasian had turned out of Jeru- 
salem and sent to sea in certain ships which had carried 
them to this land which as Peru was as yet undiscovered 
(indeed it was not discovered for another twenty years) 
was held in high estimation. 

There was another matter about which Diego Velasquez 
questioned these Indians, whether there were gold mines 
in their country, and to all his questions they answered by 
signs " Yes." They were shown gold dust, and they said 
that there was much of it in their land, and they did not 
speak the truth, for it is clear that neither at Cape Catoche 
nor in all Yucatan are there any mines either of gold or of 
silver. These Indians were also shown the mounds of 
earth in which the plants are set, from the roots of which 
Cassava bread is made. This plant is called Yuca in the 
Island of Cuba and the Indians said that it grew in their 
country, and they said Tlati for so they call the ground in 
which the roots are planted ; and, because Yuca and Tlati 
would make Yucatan the Spaniards who had joined in the 
conversation between Diego Velasquez and the Indians, 
said, ** Senor, these Indians say that their country is 
called Yucutlan'' \ so it kept that name, but in their own 
language they do not call it by that name. 

I must leave this subject and say that all of us soldiers 
who went on that voyage of discovery spent the little we 
possessed on it and we returned to Cuba wounded and in 
debt. So each soldier \^ent his own way. and soon after- 
wards our captain died, and we were a long time recovering 
from our wounds, and according to our count, fifty-seven 
soldiers died, and this was all the profit we gained by that 
expedition and discovery. But Diego Velasquez wrote 
to the Lor* Councillors who were at that time managing 
the Royal Council of the Indies, to say that he had made 



THE AUTHOR LEAVES FOR TRINIDAD. 33 

the discovery, and had expended on the expedition a 
great number of gold dollars, and so it was stated and 
published by Don Juan Rodriguez de Fonseca, Bishop of 
Burgos and Archbishop of Rosano (for thus he was called) 
who was President of the Council of the Indies, and he 
wrote to that effect to His Majesty in Flanders, giving 
much credit in his letters to Diego Velasquez, and he 
made no mention of us who made the discovery. Now I 
must stop, and I will tell later about the hardships which 
befel me and three other soldiers. 



CHAPTER VH. 

About the hardships I endured on the way to a town called 
Trinidad. 

I HAVE already said that some of us soldiers who had not 
yet recovered from our wounds remained in Havana, and 
when we had got better three of us soldiers wished to go 
to the town of Trinidad, and we arranged to go with a 
certain Pedro de Avila, a resident in Havana who was 
going to make the voyage in a canoe along the southern 
coast.^ The canoe was laden with cotton shirts which 
Pedro de Avila intended to sell at the town of Trinidad. 

I have already said that the canoes are made like hollow 
troughs, and in these countries they are used for paddling 
along the coasts. 

The arrangement we made with Avila was that we 
should give him ten gold dollars to take us in his canoe. 
So we set out along the coast, sometimes rowing and 
sometimes sailing, and after eleven days travelling, when 
near a village of friendly Indians, called Canarreo, which 

* Bernal Diaz crossed overland to San Cristóval de Havana— the 
Havana of that time— situated on the south coast (pn the river 
Onicaxinal, see Orozcoy Berra, vol. iv., p. 71), and thence took canoe 
to Trinidad 



34 WRECK OF THE CANOE. 

was the boundary of the township of Trinidad, there arose 
such a heavy gale in the night that the canoe could not 
make headway against the sea although we were all of 
us rowing, as well as Pedro de Ávila and some Indians 
from Havana, very good rowers whom we had hired to 
come with us ; we were cast upon some rocks {Seborucos\ 
which thereabouts are very large, and in so doing the canoe 
went to pieces and Avila lost his property. We all got 
ashore disabled and naked to the skin, for so as to swim 
more freely in our efforts to keep the canoe from breaking 
up we had thought it best to take off all our clothes. 

Having escaped from that mishap we found that there 
was no trail along the coast to the town of Trinidad, 
nothing but rough ground and Seborucos as they call 
them, stones that pierce the soles of one's feet ; moreover 
the waves continually broke over us, and we had nothing 
whatever to eat. To shorten the list of hardships I will 
leave out all one might say about the bleeding from our 
feet and other parts of our bodies. 

It pleased God that after great toil we came out on a 
sandy beach, and after travelling along it for two days we 
arrived at an Indian village named Yaguarama, which at 
that time belonged to Padre Fray Bartolomé de las Casas 
who was the parish priest, whom I afterwards knew as a 
doctor and a Dominican friar, and who afterwards became 
Bishop of Chiapas, — and at, that village they gave us food. 

Next day we went on to a village called Chipiana which 
belonged to Alonzo de Avila, and a certain Sandoval, 
(not the Captain Sandoval of New Spain, but another, a 
native of Tudela de Duero) and from there we went to 
Trinidad. 

A friend and countryman of mine named Antonio de 
Medina supplied me with some clothes, such as are 
worn in the Island. From Trinidad with my poverty 
and hardships I went to Santiago de Cuba where lived 



ARRIVAL AT SANTIAGO DE CUBA. 35 

the Governor, who received me with a good grace ; he 
was already making haste to send off another fleet. 

When I went to pay my respects to him, for we were 
kinsmen, he joked with me, and going from one subject 
to another, asked me if I was well enough to return to 
Yucatan, and I, laughing, asked him who had given the 
name Yucatan for in that country it was not so called, 
and he replied, "the Indians you brought back with you 
call it so," so I told him " you had better call it the land 
where half the soldiers who went there were killed and all 
those who escaped death were wounded." He answered, 
" I know that you suffered many hardships, that always 
happens to those who set out to discover new lands and 
gain honour, and His Majesty will reward you, and I will 
write to him about it, and now my son, go again in the 
fleet I am getting ready and I will tell the Captain Juan de 
Grijalva to treat you with honour." , I will stop here and 
relate what happened later. 

Here ends the discovery made by Francisco Hernandez 
whom Bernal Diaz del Castillo accompanied ; — Let us 
relate what Diego Velasquez was proposing to do. 



D 2 



THE EXPEDITION UNDER JUAN 
DE GRIJALVA. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

How Diego Velasquez, Governor of the Island of Cuba, ordered 
another fleet to be sent to the lands which we had discovered 
and a kinsman of his, a nobleman named Juan de Grijalva, 
went as Captain General, besides three other Captains, whose 
names I will give later on. 

In the year 1518 the Governor of Cuba hearing the 
good account of the land which we had discovered, 
which is called Yucatan, decided to send out another 
fleet, and made search for four vessels to compose it 
Two of these vessels were two of the three which had 
accompanied Francisco Hernandez, the other two were 
vessels which Diego Velasquez bought with his own 
money. 

At the time the fleet was being fitted out, there were 
present in Santiago de Cuba, where Velasquez resided 
Juan de Grijalva, Alonzo de Avila, Francisco de Montejo, 
and Pedro de Alvarado, who had come to see the 
Governor on business, for all of them held encomiendas 
of Indians in the Island. As they were men of dis- 
tinction, it was agreed that Juan de Grijalva who was 
a kinsman of Diego Velasquez, should go as Captain 
General, that Alonzo de Avila, Pedro de Alvarado, and 
Francisco de Montejo should each have command of a 
ship. Each of these Captains contributed the provisions 
and stores of Cassava bread and salt pork, and Diego 
Velasquez provided the four ships, crossbows and guns, 
some beads and other articles of small value for barter. 



Series II. Vol. XXIll. 




w:^-£W^^ 







M#-^UScSI 






i*^'7w 3^ Imy/f^dC' ? ^--^ j^ 



Facaimile (reduced) of Title-page of 

HERRERA. DECADE II. 
Showing portraits of DiEGO VELASQUEZ, & JUAN DE GRIJALVA. 

Prom Mr, Orenville^s co?y in the British Museutn. 
Reproduced and printed for the Hakluyt Society by Donald Macbeth, I90S. 



THE PILOTS AND CAPTAINS. 37 

and a small supply of beans. Then Diego Velasquez 
ordered that I should go with these Captains as ensign. 

As the report had spread that the lands were very rich 
and that there were masonry houses there, and the Indian 
Julianillo whom we had brought from Cape Catoche had 
said that there was gold, the soldiers and settlers who 
possessed no Indians in Cuba were greedily eager to go 
to the new land, so that 240 companions were soon got 
together. 

Then every one of us, out of his own funds, added what 
he could of stores and arms and other suitable things ; 
and I set out again on this voyage as ensign, as I have 
already stated. 

As /ar as I can make out the instructions given by the 
Governor were that we should obtain by barter all the 
gold and silver that could be procured, and that if it 
appeared to be advisable to form a settlement, and if 
we could venture to do so, that a settlement should be 
made, but if not that then we should return to Cuba. 

There came with us, as Veedor of the fleet, a man 
named Peiialosa, a native of Segovia, and we took with 
us a priest named Juan Diaz, a native of Seville, and the 
same two pilots who were with us on the former voyage, 
namely, Anton de Alaminos of Palos, Camacho of Triana, 
besides Juan Alvarez el Manquillo, from Huelva, and 
there was also another pilot who called himself Sopuesta, 
who came from Moguer. 

Before I go any further, as I shall have to speak many 
times of these hidalgos who were our Captains, and it 
seems to me discourteous merely to give their names, let 
it be known that later on they all become persons of title ; 
Pedro de Alvarado became Adelantado^ and Governor of 
Guatemala and a Commander of the Order of Santiago, 

* Adelantado = Govemor-in-chie£ 



38 THE STORY OF MATANZAS. 

Montejo, Adelantado of Yucatan and Governor of Hon- 
duras, but Alonzo de Avila did not have the same luck as 
the others for he was captured by the French, as I will 
relate later on in the chapter which treats of the subject 
I shall speak of these gentlemen simply by their own 
names, until such time as His Majesty conferred on them 
the dignities I have mentioned. 

To return to my story ; we set out in the four ships 
along the north coast to a port called Matanzas, near to 
the old Havana,^ (for at that time Havana was not in its 
present position), and in that port most of the settlers of 
Havana had their farms whence the ships obtained all the 
supplies they needed of Cassava and 'pork, for, as I have 
already said, there were as yet neither sheep nor cattle in 
Cuba, for the Island was but lately conquered. Here we 
were joined by the Captains and soldiers who were going 
to make the voyage. 

Before going on, although it does not concern the story, 
I wish to say why this port was called Matanzas. I call it 
to mind because I have been asked the question by a 
historian in Spain who records matters that have hap- 
pened, and this is the reason why the name was given it 
Before the Island of Cuba was conquered a ship with more 
than thirty Spanish men and two women on board was 
driven ashore on the coast near the river and port now 
called Matanzas. Many Indians from Havana and the 
neighbouring towns came out with the intention of killing 
the Spaniards, but as the Indians did not dare to attack 
them on land, they offered, with fair words and flattery, 
to ferry the Spaniards in canoes across the river, which is 
very large and rapid, and to take them to their houses and 
give them food. 

When the middle of the river was reached, the Indians 

^ Axaruco. 



DISCOVERY OF COZUMEL. 39 

upset the canoes and killed all the Spaniards except three 
men and one woman who was beautiful and was carried 
off by one of the caciques concerned in the plot, and 
the three Spanish men were divided among the other 
caciques. This is the reason why the place is called 
Matanzas.^ 

I knew the woman, and after the conquest of Cuba 
she was taken from the Cacique in whose power she had 
been, and I saw her married to a settler named Pedro 
Sanchez Farfan in the town of Trinidad. I also knew the 
three Spaniards, one was named Gonzalo Mejia, an old 
man from Jerez, another was Juan Santistéban, a youth 
from Madrigal, and the other was called Cascorro* a 
seaman, a native of Moguer. 

I have delayed too long in telling this old tale, and it 
will be said that in spinning old yarns I am forgetting my 
narrative, so let us get back to it : — 

As soon as all of us soldiers had got together and the 
pilots had received their instructions and the lantern 
signals had been arranged, after hearing mass, we set out 
on the 8th April, 1518. 

In ten days we doubled the point of Guaniguanico 
which is also called San Anton and after eight days 
sailing we sighted the Island of Cozumel,' which was then 
first discovered, for with the current that was running 
we made much more lee-way than when we came with 
Francisco Hernandez de Cordova, and we went along the 
south side of the Island and sighted a town with a 



* /.^., the place of killing. 

• The Alonzo Remón Edition adds : " The cacique with whom he 
stayed married him to his daughter, and he had his ears and nose 
pierced like an Indian." 

' This would imply that land was first sighted on the 26th April. 
The Itinerario says that the fleet left Cuba on the ist May, and 
that land was sighted on the 3rd May, and as it was the day of Santa 
Cruz they gave the land that name. 



40 THE StÓRV Of THE CAKOE TtíAT DRlfTEÖ 

few houses, near which was a good anchorage free from 
reefs. 

We went on shore with the Captain and a large company 
of soldiers, and the natives of the town had taken to flight 
as soon as they saw the ships coming under sail, for they 
had never seen such a thing before. 

We soldiers who landed found two old men, who could 
not walk far, hidden in the maize fields and we brought 
them to the Captain. With the help of the two Indians 
Julianillo and Melchorejo whom Francisco Hernandez 
brought away, who thoroughly understood that language 
(for there is not more than four leagues of sea between 
their land and the Island of Cozumel, and the language is 
the same) the captain spoke kindly to these old men and 
gave them some beads and sent them off to summon the 
cacique of the town, and they went off and never came 
back again. 

While we were waiting, a good-looking Indian woman 
appeared and b^an to speak in the language of the 
Island of Jamaica, and she told us that all the men and 
women of the town had fled to the woods for fear of 
us. As I and many of our soldiers knew the language 
she spoke very well, for it is the same as that spoken 
in Cuba, we were very much astonished, and asked the 
woman how she happened to be there ; she replied that 
two years earlier she had started from Jamaica with ten 
Indians in a large canoe intending to go and fish near 
some small islands, and that the currents had carried them 
over to this land where they had been driven ashore, 
and that her husband and all the Jamaica Indians had 
been killed and sacrificed to the Idols. When the Captain 
heard this it seemed to him that this woman would serve 
very well as a messenger, so he sent her to summon the 
people and caciques of the town, and he gave her two 
days in which to go and return. We were afraid that the 



tkONÍ JAMAÍCA to YÚCATAtí. 4I 

Indians Melchorejo and Julianillo if once they got away 
from us would go off to their own country which was 
near by, and on that account we could not trust them 
as messengers. 

To return to the Indian woman from Jamaica, the 
answer she brought was that notwithstanding her efforts 
she could not persuade a single Indian to approach us. 

We called the town Santa Cruz because it was the day 
of Santa Cruz when we first entered it ; we found there 
very good hives of honey and many sweet potatoes, and 
herds of the pigs of the country which have the navel* 
above the spine. 

There are three townships on the Island, the one where 
we landed being the largest and the other two smaller, 
and each one stood at one end of the island, these I saw 
and visited when I returned the third time with Cortez. 

The Island is about two leagues* in circumference. 

I must go on to say that as the Captain Juan de 
Grijalva saw that it would be merely losing time t© wait 
there any longer, he ordered us to go on board ship, and 
the Indian woman went with us, and we continued our 
voyage.' 

^ A scent gland. 

* This must be a misprint for " twenty leagues," for the island is at 
least fifty-five miles in circumference. 

' From the accounts given in the Itinerario de Grijalva and in the 
letter written to Charles V by the Municipality of Vera Cruz (loth July, 
1 5 19) it seems clear that on leaving Cozumel, Grijalva sailed for about 
fifty miles southwards along the east coast of Yucatan until he reached 
the Bay of Ascension, which he named, and then turned north again 
and rounded Cape Catoche. In this passage the author of the 
Itinerario says, '* Arrived at the coast we saw three large towns 
separated about two miles one from the other, and we saw in them 
many stone houses and very high towers, and many houses of 
thatch." 

Possibly this town was what is now known as the Ruins of Tulum. 



4^ AkRIVEÖ At CÍÍANt^OTÓN. 



CHAPTER IX. 

H ow we followed the same course that we had taken with Francisco 
Hernandez de Cordova ; how we landed at Chanpoton and how 
an attack was made on us, and what else happened. 

As soon as we were all on board we kept on the old course, 
the same that was followed by Francisco Hernandez de 
Cordova, and in eight days we reached the neighbourhood 
of the town of Chanpoton which was the place where the 
Indians of that province had defeated us, as I have already 
related in a former chapter. As the tide runs out very 
far in the bay, we anchored our ships a league from the 
shore and then making use of all the boats we disembarked 
half the soldiers close to the houses of the town. 

The Indians of the town and others from the neighbour- 
hood at once assembled, as they had done on the other 
occasion when they killed over fifty-six of our soldiers 
and wounded all the rest, as I have already related, and 
for that reason they were now very proud and haughty, 
and they were well armed in their own manner with 
bows, arrows, and lances, some of them as long as our 
lances and some of them shorter, and shields and macanas 
and two-handed swords and slings and stones, and they 
wore cotton armour and carried trumpets and drums, and 
many of them had their faces painted black and others red 
and white. They were drawn up in array and awaited us 
on the shore, ready to fall on us as we landed. As we had 
already gained experience from our former expedition, we 
had brought with us in the boat some falconets and were 
well supplied with crossbows and guns. 

As we approached the shore they began to shoot arrows 
and hurl lances at us with all their might, and although we 
did them much damage with our falconets, such a hail 
storm of arrows fell on us before we could land that half of 
us were wounded As soon as all the soldiers got on shore 



DEFEAT OF THE INDIANS AT CÖANPOTON. 43 

we checked their ardour with our good sword play and 
with our crossbows, and although they still shot at us as 
at targets, we all wore cotton armour, yet they kept up 
the fight against us for a good while until we drove them 
back into some swamps near to the town. In this fight 
seven soldiers were killed, among them Juan de Quiteria, 
a man of importance, and our Captain Juan de Grijalva 
received three arrow wounds, and had two of his teeth 
broken, and more than sixty of us were wounded.* 

When we saw that all the enemy had taken to flight we 
entered the town and attended to the wounded and buried 
the dead. We could not find a single person in the town, 
nor could we find those who had retreated into the swamp 
for they had all disappeared. In that skirmish we captured 
three Indians one of whom was a chief, and the Captain 
sent them off to summon the cacique of the town, giving 
them clearly to understand through the interpreters 
Julianillo and Melchorejo that they were pardoned for 
what they had done, and he gave them some green beads 
to hand to the cacique as a sign of peace, and they went 
off and never returned again. So we believed that the 
Indians, Julianillo and Melchorejo had not repeated to 
the prisoners what they had been told to say to them but 
had said something quite different. 

At that town we stayed for three days. 

I remember that this fight took place in some fields 
where there were many locusts, and while we were fighting 
they jumped up and came flying in our faces, and as the 
Indian archers were pouring a hail storm of arrows on us 
we sometimes mistook the arrows for locusts and did not 
shield ourselves from them and so got wounded ; at other 
times we thought that they were arrows coming towards 

^ The author of the IHnerario and the Letter from the Municipality 
of Vera Cruz to Charles V make this fight uke place at Campeche 
and say one Spaniard was killed. 



44 VOVaGÉ CONtl^UfeÖ. 

us, when they were only flying locusts and it greatly 
hampered our fighting. I must leave this and go on to 
tell how we embarked and kept on our course. 



CHAPTER X. 

How we went on our way and entered a large and broad river to 
which we then gave the name of the Boca de Términos. 

Keeping on our course we reached what seemed to be 
the mouth of a very rapid river, very broad and open, 
but it was not a river as we at first thought it to be, but 
it was a very good harbour. 

Because there was land on both sides of us and the 
water was so wide that it looked like a strait, the pilot 
Alaminos said that here the Island ended and the main- 
land began, and that was the reason why we called it the 
Boca de Términos,^ and so it is named on the charts. 

The Captain Juan de Grijalva went ashore with all the 
other Captains already mentioned and many soldiers. We 
spent three days taking soundings at the mouth of the 
strait and exploring up and down the bay until we came 
to the end of it, and found out that there was no island, 
but that we were in a bay which formed a very good 
harbour. On shore we found some houses built of 
masonry, used as oratories of their Idols, and many 
Idols of pottery, wood and stone, which were the images 
of their gods, and some of them were figures of women 



* It is not quite clear by which opening the vessels entered the 
Laguna de Terminos. Orozco y Berra {Hist Antigua^ vol. iv, page 
31) says at the Puerto Escondido— it seems more likely to have been 
at the Puerto Real. Had they entered by the west entrance or Puerto 
Principal they must have attracted the attention of the people of 
Xicolango, then a considerable town and a Mexican outpost (See 
Relacion de Melchor de Alfaro Santa Crux in Colecdon de Documentos 
Ineditos^ Reladones de Yucatan^ vol. ii. Madrid, 1898). 



DISCOVERY OF THE RIO DE TABASCO. 45 

and others figures of serpents and there were many 
deer's antlers. 

We thought there must be a town close by, and as 
it was such a safe port we considered that it would be 
a good place for a settlement, but we found out that it 
was altogether uninhabited, and that the oratories were 
merely those belonging to traders and hunters who put 
into the port when passing in their canoes and made 
sacrifices there. We had much deer and rabbit hunting 
and with the help of a lurcher we killed ten deer and 
many rabbits. At last when we had finished our 
soundings and explorations we made ready to go on 
board ship, but the lurcher got left behind. The sailors 
call this place the Puerto de Términos. 

As soon as we were all on board we kept our course 
close along the shore until we arrived at a river which 
they call the Rio de Tabasco, which we named Rio de 
Grijalva. 



CHAPTER XI. 



How we arrived at the Rio de Tabasco which we named the 
River Grijalva, and what happened to us there. 

Making our way along the coast towards the west, by 
day, but not daring to sail during the night for fear of 
shoals and reefs, at the end of three days we came in 
sight of the mouth of a very broad river, and we went 
near in shore with the ships, as it looked like a good port. 
As we came nearer in we saw the water breaking over 
the bar at the mouth of the river, so we got out boats, 
and by sounding we found out that the two larger vessels 
could not enter the river, so it was agreed that they should 
anchor outside in the sea, and that all the soldiers should 
go up the river in the other two vessels which drew less 
water and in the boats. 



46 SPANIARDS LAND NEAR THE TOWN. 

This we did because we saw many Indians in canoes 
along the banks of the river armed with bows and arrows 
and other weapons, after the manner of the people of 
Chanpoton, and we knew that there must be a large 
town in the neighbourhood. 

As we had coasted along we had already seen nets 
set in the sea for catching iish, and had gone in the boat 
which was towed astern of the flagship and had taken fish 
out of two of them. 

This river was called the Rio de Tabasco because the 
chief of the town called himself Tabasco, and as we 
discovered it on this voyage and Juan de Grijalva was 
its discoverer, we named it the Rio de Grijalva and so 
it is marked on the charts. 

To go back to my story, when we arrived within half a 
league of the town we could hear the sound of chopping 
wood for the Indians were making barriers and stockades 
and getting ready to give us battle. When we were 
aware of this, so as to make certain, we disembarked 
half a league from the town on a point of land where 
some palm trees were growing. When the Indians saw 
us there a fleet of fifty canoes approached us full of 
warriors clad in cotton armour and carrying bows and 
arrows, lances and shields, drums and plumes of feathers. 
Many other canoes full of warriors were lying in the 
creeks, and they kept a little way off as though they 
did not dare to approach as did the first fleet. When 
we perceived their intentions we were on the point of 
firing at them with guns and crossbows, but it pleased 
God that we agreed to call out to them, and through 
Julianillo and Melchorejo, who spoke their language very 
well, we told them that they need have no fear, that we 
wished to talk to them, for we had things to tell them 
which when they understood them they would be glad 
that we bad cpme to their country and their homes, 



PARLEY WITH THE INDIANS, 47 

Moreover, we wished to give them some of the things 
we had brought with us. As they understood what was 
said to them, four of the canoes came near with about 
thirty Indians in them, and we showed them strings of 
green beads and small mirrors and blue cut glass beads,^ 
and as soon as they saw them they assumed a more 
friendly manner, for they thought that they were chal- 
chihuite^ which they value greatly. 

Then through Julianillo and Melchorejo as interpreters, 
the Captain told them that we came from a distant 
country and were the vassals of a great Emperor named 
Don Carlos, who had many great lords and chiefs as his 
vassals, and that they ought to acknowledge him as their 
lord, and it would be to their advantage to do so, and that 
in return for the beads they might bring us some food and 
poultry. 

Two of the Indians answered us, one of them was a 
chief and the other was a Papa, that is, a sort of priest 
who has care of their Idols, for as I have said before, in 
New Spain they are called Papas. They replied that they 
would bring the food which we asked for, and would 
barter their things for ours ; but as for the rest, they 
already had a chief, that we were only just now arrived 
and knew nothing about them, and yet we wanted to give 
them a chief. Let us beware not to make war on them 
as we had done at Potonchan,* for they had more than 
three jiquipiUs of warriors from all the provinces around 
in readiness {ewtry jiqMtptl numbers eight thousand men) 
and they said that they were well aware that only a few 
days earlier we had killed and wounded more than two 
hundred men at Potonchan* but that they were not 

^ Literally, blue diamonds. 

' Chalchihuitli is Jadeite, which was treasured as a precious stone 
by the Indians. 
* Chanpoton. 



48 THE INDIANS BRING PRESENTS. 

weaklings such as those, and for this reason they had 
come to talk to us and find out what we wanted, and that 
whatever we should tell them they would go and report 
to the chiefs of many towns who had assembled to decide 
on peace or war. 

Then our Captain embraced the Indians as a sign of 
peace, and gave them some strings of beads and told 
them to go and bring back an answer as soon as possible, 
but he said that although we did not wish to anger them, 
that if they did not return we should have to force our 
way into their town. 

These messengers whom we sent spoke to the Caciques 
and Papas, who also have a voice in their affairs, and they 
decided that it was better to keep the peace and supply us 
with food, and that between them and the neighbouring 
towns they would soon seek a present of gold to give us 
and secure our friendship, so that what had happened to 
the people of Potonchan^ would not happen to them. 

From what I saw and learnt afterwards, it is the custom 
in these provinces, and in other countries in New Spain to 
give presents when making peace, and this will be clearly 
seen later on. 

The following day more than thirty Indians with their 
chief came to the promontory under the palm trees where 
we were camped and brought roasted fish and fowls, 
and zapote fruit and maize bread, and brasiers with live 
coals and incense, and they fumigated us all. Then they 
spread on the ground some mats, which here they call 
petateSy and over them a cloth, and they presented some 
golden jewels, some were diadems, and others were in the 
shape of ducks, like those in Castille, and other jewels like 
lizards and three necklaces of hollow beads, and other 
articles of gold but not of much value, for they were not 

^ Chanpoton, 



THE SPANIARDS HEAR OF MEXICO. 49 

worth more than two hundred dollars. They also brought 
some cloaks and skirts, such as they wear, and said that 
we must accept these things in good part as they had no 
more gold to give us, but that further on, in the direction 
of the sunset, there was plenty of gold, and they said 
" Colua, Colua, Méjico, Méjico," but we did not know 
what this Colua or Méjico could be. Although the present 
that they brought us was not worth much, we were satisfied, 
because we thus knew for certain that they possessed gold. 
As soon as they had given their present they said that we 
should at once set out on our way and the Captain, Juan 
de Grijalva, thanked them for their gift and gave them a 
present of beads. It was decided that we should go on 
board at once, for the two ships were in much danger 
should a northerly gale blow for it would put them on 
a lee shore, and moreover we wanted to get nearer to 
where we were told there was gold. 



CHAPTER XII. 



How we followed along the coast towards the setting sun, and 
arrived at a river called the Rio de Banderas, and what 
happened there. 

We returned on board and set our course along the 
coast and in two days came in sight of a town called 
Ayagualulco, and many of the Indians from that town 
marched along the shore with shields made of the shells of 
turtle, which sparkled as the sun shone on them, and some 
of our soldiers contended that they were made of low 
grade gold. 

The Indians who carried them as they marched along 
the sandy beach, knowing that they were at a safe distance, 



1 

\ 



50 VOYAGE ALONG THE MEXICAN COAST. 

cut capers, as though mocking at the ships. We gave the 
town the name of La Rambla, and it is thus marked on 
the charts. 

Coasting along we came in sight of a bay into which 
flows the river Tonalá, which we entered on our return 
journey and named the Rio de San Antonio, and so it is 
marked on the charts. 

As we sailed along we noted the position of the great 
river Coatzacoalcos, and we wished to enter the bay [not 
merely] to see what it was like, but because the weather 
was unfavourable. Soon we came in sight of the great 
snow mountains, which have snow on them all the year 
round, and we saw other mountains, nearer to the sea, 
which we called the range of San Martin, and we gave 
it that name because the first man to see them was a 
soldier from Havana who had come with us named San 
Martin. 

As we followed along the coast, the Captain Pedro de 
Alvarado, went ahead with his ship and entered a river 
which the Indians call Papaloapan, and which we then 
called the Rio de Alvarado because Alvarado was the first 
to enter it. There, some Indian fishermen, natives of a town 
called Tlacotalpa gave him some fish. We waited at the 
mouth of the river with the other three ships until 
Alvarado came out, and the General was very angry 
with him for going up the river without his permission, 
and ordered him never to go ahead of the other ships 
again, lest an accident should happen when we could not 
give him help. 

We kept on our course, all four ships together until we 
arrived at the mouth of another river, which we called the 
Rio de Banderas,^ because we there came on a great 
number of Indians with long lances, and on every 

^ Rio de Banderas is the Rio Jamapa of the modem maps. 



ARRIVAL AT THE RIO DE BANDERAS. SI 

lance a great cloth banner which they waved as they 
beckoned to us. And what happened I will tell in the 
next chapter. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

How we arrived at the Rio de Banderas and what 
happened there. 

Some studious readers in Spain and other people who 
have been to New Spain, may have heard that Mexico 
was a very great city built in the water like Venice, and 
that it was governed by a great prince who was King 
over many provinces and ruled over all the lands of New 
Spain, a territory which is more than twice as large as 
Castille, and that this Prince was called Montezuma, and 
that as he was so powerful he wished to extend his rule 
beyond what was possible. He had received news of our 
arrival when we came first, with Francisco Hernandez de 
Cordova, and of what had happened at the battle of 
Catoche and at Chanpoton, and also what had happened 
at the battle at this same Chanpoton during this voyage, 
and he knew that we soldiers being few in number had 
defeated the warriors of that town and their very 
numerous allies, and he knew as well that we had 
entered the Rio Tabasco and what had taken place 
between us and the caciques of that town, moreover he 
understood that our object was to seek for gold, in 
exchange for the tHííTgs we te'd'^ brought with us. All 
this news had been brought to him painted on a cloth 
made of hennequen^ which is like linen, and as he knew ) 
that we were coasting along towards his provinces he sent j 
orders to his governors that if we should arrive in their 



^ Hennequen, or Sisal hemp, is a species of Aloe (Agave Ixtli) now 
largely used for cordage. 

E 2 



\ 



-y J. 

/ 

52 AN ANCIENT INDIAN PROPHECY. 

1^ J neighbourhood with our ships that they should barter 

I gold for our beads, especially the green beads, which are 
something like their chalchihuites, which they value as 
. highly as emeralds ; he also ordered them to find out 
more about our persons and our plans. 

It is a fact, as we now know, that their Indian ancestors 
had foretold that men with beards would come from the 
direction of the sunrise and would rule over them. What- 
j ever the reason may have been many Indians sent by the 
I Great Montezuma were watching for us at the river 1 have 
I mentioned with long poles, and on every pole a banner of 
Iwhite cotton cloth, which they waved and called to us, as 
Ithough making signals of peace, to come to them. 

When from the ships we saw such an unusual sight we 
were fairly astonished, and the general and most of the 
Captains were agreed that to find out what it meant we 
should lower two of the boats, and that all those who 
carried guns or crossbows and twenty of the most daring 
and active soldiers should go in them, and that Francisco 
de Montejo should accompany us, and that if we should 
discover that the men who were waving the banners were 
warriors that we should at once bring news of it and of 
anything else that we could find out. 

Thank God at that time we had fine weather which is 
rare enough on this coast. When we got on shore we 
found three Caciques, one of them the governor appointed 
by Montezuma, who had many of the Indians of his house- 
hold with him. They brought many of the fowls of the 
country and maize bread such as they always eat, and 
fruits such as pineapples and zapotes, which in other 
parts are called mameies, and they were seated under the 
shade of the trees, and had spread mats on the ground, 
and they invited us to be seated, all by signs, for 
Julianillo the man from Cape Catoche, did not under- 
stand their language which is Mexican. Then they 



Bartering for jewels of gold. 53 

brought pottery braziers with live coals, and fumigated 
us with a sort of resin. 

As soon as the Captain Montejo had reported all that 
had taken place to the general, he [the captain general] 
determined to anchor his ships and go ashore with all his 
captains and soldiers. When the Caciques and governors 
saw him on land and knew that he was the Captain 
General of us all, according to their custom, they paid 
him the greatest respect. In return he treated them in a 
most caressing manner and ordered them to be given blue 
and green glass beads aqd by signs he made them under- 
stand that they should bring gold to barter with us. 
Then the Governor sent orders to all the neighbouring 
towns to bring jewels to exchange with us, and during 
the six days that we remained there they brought more 
than sixteen thousand dollars worth of jewelry of low 
grade gold, worked into various forms. 

This must be the gold which the historians Gómara, 
Yllescas and Jovio say was given by the natives of 
Tabasco, and they have written it down as though it 
were true, although it is well known to eye witnesses 
that there is no gold in the Province of the Rio de 
Grijalva or anywhere near it and very few jewels. 

When the General saw that the Indians were not 
bringing any more gold to barter, and as we had already 
been there six days and the ships ran risk of danger from 
the North and North East wind, he thought it was time to 
embark. 

So we took [formal] possession of the land in the name 
of His Majesty, and as soon as this had been done the 
General spoke to the Indians and told them that we 
wished to return to our ships and he gave them presents 
of some shirts from Spain. We took one of the Indians 
from this place on board ship with us, and after he had 
learnt our language he became a Christian and was named 



54 THE ISLA DE SACRIFICIOS. 

Francisco, and later on I met him living with his Indian 
wife. 

As we sailed on along the coast we sighted an Island^ 
of white sand which the sea washed over, it appeared to be 
.about three leagues distant from the land, and we called it 
the Isla Blanca and it is marked thus on the charts. Not 
far from the Isla Blanca we observed another Island with 
many green trees on it, lying about four leagues from the 
coast and we gave it the name of Isla Verde and going on 
further we saw an Island somewhat larger than the others 
about a league and a half off the shore, and in front of it 
there was a good roadstead where the General gave orders 
for the ships to come to anchor. 

' As soon as the boats were launched the Captain Juan 

de Grijalva and many of us soldiers went off to visit the 

Island for we saw smoke rising from it, and we found two 

inasonry houses very well built, each house with steps 

? leading up to some altars, and on these altars were idols 

." ivith evil looking bodies, which were the gods of the 

: /Indians and that very night five Indians had been sacri- 

/ficed before them ; their chests had been cut open, and 

I the arms and thighs had been cut off and the walls were 

I covered with blood. 

At all this we stood greatly .amazed, and gave the 
Island the name of the Isla de Sacriiicios and it is so 
marked on the charts. 

We all of us went ashore opposite that Island, and on 
the broad sandy beach we put up huts and shelters made 
with branches of trees and sails taken from the ships. 

Now many Indians had come down to the coast bringing 
gold made into small articles which they wished to barter 
as they had done at the Rio de Banderas, and, as we 



1 Bemal Diaz is not quite correct about the comparative size of the 
Islands. The. accompanying chart shows their size and position. 



SAN JUAN DE ULUA. 55 

afterwards found out the great Montezuma had ordered 
them to do so. These Indians who brought the gold 
were very timid and the gold was small in quantity, for 
this reason the Captain Juan de, Grijalva ordered the 
anchors to be raised and sail set, and we went on to 
anchor opposite another Island, about half a league from 
land, and it is at this Island that the port of Vera Cruz is 
now established. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

How we arrived at the Island now called San Juan de Ulúa, and 
the reason why that name was given to it, and what happened to 
us there. 

We landed on a sandy beach, and so as to escape the 
swarms of mosquitos we built huts on the tops of the 
highest sand dunes, which are very extensive in these 
parts. 

From our boats we made careful soundings of the 
harbour and found that there was a good bottom and 
that under the shelter of the Island our ships would be 
safe from the Northerly gales. 

As soon as this was done the General and thirty of us 
soldiers, well armed, went in two boats to the Island and 
we found there a temple where there was a very large 
and ugly idol which was called Tescatepuca^ and in 
charge of it were four Indians with very large black 
cloaks and hoods, such as the Dominicans or canons 
wear, or very much like them, and these were the priests 
of the idols, and they are commonly called Papas in New 
Spain, as I have said before. 

They had this day sacrificed two boys and cut open 

^ TeUcatlipoca. 



$6 HUMAN SACRIFICES. 

their chests, and offered the blood and hearts to that 
cursed Idol. The priests came towards us to fumigate 
us with the incense with which they had fumigated their 
Tescatepuca, for when we approached them they were 
burning something which had the scent of incense, but 
we would not allow them to fumigate us, for we all felt 
much pity at seeing those two boys who had just been 
killed and at beholding such great cruelty. The General 
asked the Indian Francisco, already mentioned by me, 
whom we had brought from the Rio de Banderas, and 
who seemed to be fairly intelligent what they had done 
this for, and Francisco by means of signs (we had no inter- 
preter, for as I have already said, Julianillo and Melchorejo 
did not understand the Mexican language) replied that the 
people of Culua had ordered the sacrifice to be made. As 
he was halting in his speech he said Uliia, Ulua, and as 
our Captain who was present was named Juan, and it was 
the day of San Juan in June, we called the Island San . 
Juan de Ulua. This port is now very well known, and 
great shelter walls have been erected so as to protect the 
ships from the North wind, and it is here that all the 
merchandise from Castille for Mexico and New Spain is 
landed. 

To go back to my story, while we were encamped on 
the sand hills, Indians from the towns round about came 
to barter gold and jewels in exchange for our goods, but 
they brought so few things and those of such poor value 
that we took no count of it. 

We stayed there for seven days, but we could not 
endure the mosquitos, and seeing that we were wasting 
time, and as we now knew for certain that these lands were 
not Islands but the Mainland, and that it contained large 
towns and multitudes of Indians, and seeing that our 
cassava bread was very mouldy and dirty with weevils 
and was going sour, and that the soldiers of our company 



ALVARAt)0 RETURNS TO CUfiA. $7 

were not numerous enough to form a settlement, all the 
more so as thirteen soldiers had died of their wounds, and 
four others were still suffering, so taking all I have said 
into consideration it was agreed that we should send to 
inform the Governor Diego Velasquez of our condition, so 
that he could send us help. 

Juan de Grijalva had the greatest desire to form a settle- 
ment even with the few soldiers he had with him, and 
always showed the courage of a very valiant and energetic 
Captain, and was not such a man as the historian Gómara 
describes. 

It was therefore decided that the Captain Pedro de 
Alvarado should go in a very good ship called the San 
Sebastian to carry the message. This was agreed to for 
two reasons, one was that Juan de Grijalva and the other 
captains were not on good terms with Alvarado on account 
of his entry into the Rio Papaloapan (which we then named 
the Rio Alvarado) the other reason was that Alvarado 
had come on this voyage unwillingly, as he was far from 
well. 

It was also arranged that the sick men and all the gold 
and the cloth which had been gained by barter should be 
sent back in the San Sebastian, The Captains wrote to 
Diego Velasquez, each one what he thought fit, and then 
the ship set sail and made for the Island of Cuba, and 
there I will leave them for the present, both Pedro de 
Alvarado and his voyage, and will tell how Diego 
Velasquez had sent in search of us. 



58 ANXIETY or DIEGO VELASQUEZ. 



CHAPTER XV. 

How Diego Velasquez, the Governor of Cuba, sent a ship in search 
of us, and what else happened. 

No soorrer had we sailed from the Island of Cuba on 
our voyage with Captain Juan de Grijalva, than Diego 
Velasquez began to be anxious lest some calamity had 
befallen us, and he was always longing for news of us, so 
he sent a small ship with some soldiers in search of us, 
under the command of Cristóval de Olid, a person of 
consideration and very energetic (who was afterwards 
Maestro de Campó^ in the expedition under Cortes). 
Diego Velasquez ordered him to follow the track 
of Francisco Hernandez de Cordova until he should 
overtake us. 

It appears that Cristóval de Olid, when he went in 
search of us, was struck by a heavy gale while anchored 
near the coast of Yucatan, and the pilot whom they had 
on board, so as to save the vessel from* foundering at 
anchor, ordered the cables to be cut, so they lost their 
anchors and returned to Santiago de Cuba. 

Diego Velasquez was at the port and heard that they 
brought no news of us, and if he was anxious before, he 
was doubly so now. However, about this time the Captain, 
Pedro de Alvarado, arrived with the gold, and the cloth, 
and the sick men, and with the whole story of what we 
had discovered ; and when the Governor beheld the gold 
jewelry that the Captain Pedro de Alvarado had brought 
with him, he greatly overestimated its value. 

There were present with Diego Velasquez many in- 
habitants from the city and from other parts of the 
Island, who had come on business, and when the king's 

^ Quartermaster. 



Series II. Vol. XXIIl. 




i^M^ OttJúJ^OftKttíTfnU f*^m 




> His TO RiA Gene 



iittcMin Dvfitf4iMnjtef t! zttrftkoyf 




,i^'^ 
kMi 



<jy <^tittnmecv^ 




RALDELOSHECH© 

DELOSCASTELLANOS 

ENLAS JSLAS ITIERRAD 

FTRME DELMAROCEANO 

ESCKÍTA PORANTONIOBE 

HERRERA CO ROK J STA. 

MAIORDE iV N^TSEÍ^ 

ÍNDLW Y SV œRONÍSK 

fÍí'^'í^ DECADATERZERA 



c- 

















Í'lí^,! 



-r-x-""^'^?^ 






Facsimile (reduced) of TiiU-?age of 

HERRERA, DECADE HI. 
Showing portraits of CORTES, CRISTOVAL DE OLID, GONZALO DE SANDOVAL, 
the capture of GUATEMOC, etc. 

Reproduced and printed for the Hakluyt Society by Donald Macbeth, 1908. 
Plate 4. .To face pane 58- 



ALVARADO TELLS HIS STORY. 59 

officers took the Royal Fifth, which belongs to His 
Majesty, they were astonished at our having discovered 
such rich lands, (for Peru was not discovered until twenty 
years later). 

Pedro de Alvarado knew very well how to tell his story, 
and they say that Diego Velasquez could do nothing but 
embrace him, and order great rejoicings and sports for 
eight days. Report had been rife enough before about 
these rich lands, and with the arrival of the gold it rose 
to exaggeration throughout the Islands and in Castille, 
as I shall tell later on ; but I must leave Diego Velasquez 
keeping holiday, and return to our ships which were at 
San Juan de Ulúa, and I shall go on to relate how we 
agreed to proceed with our exploration of the coast. 



CHAPTER XVI. 



How we went on exploring the coast as far as the Province 
of Panuco, and what else happened before our return to 
Cuba. 

After the Captain, Pedro de Alvarado had left us to 
go to the Island of Cuba, (as I have already related) it 
was decided by the General, Captains, and soldiers, and 
approved of by the Pilots, that we should keep in close 
to the shore and discover all that we were able on the 
coast. Keeping on our course we came in sight of the 
3ierra de Tuztla,^ and further on, two days later, we saw 
some other higher ranges which are now called the Sierra 
de Tuzpa, after a town of that name near by. As we 
coasted along, we saw many towns apparently two or 



* This is an error ; the Sierra de Tuxtla lies between the Sierra San 
Martin and the mouth of the Papaloapan River, and had been passed 
before arriving at San Juan de Ulúa. It is Tuxpan (about lat 
20 deg. N } that was now sighted. 



6o THE RIO t)E CANOAS- « 

three leagues inland and these would belong to the 
province of Panuco. Continuing our course, we came 
to a great and rapid river which we called the Rio de 
Canoas^ and dropped anchor at the mouth of it. 

When all three ships were anchored and we were a 
little off our guard, twenty large canoes filled with Indian 
warriors, armed with bows, arrows, and lances, came down 
the river and made straight for the smallest ship which lay 
nearest the shore, and was commanded by Francisco de 
Montejo. The Indians shot a flight of arrows which 
wounded five soldiers, and they made fast to the ship 
with ropes intending to carry her off, and even cut one 
of her cables with their copper axes. However, the 
captain and soldiers fought well, and upset three of the 
canoes, and we hastened to their assistance in our boats, 
with guns and crossbows, and we wounded more than a 
third of the Indians, so they returned from their unlucky 
expedition whence they had come. Then we got up 
anchor and set sail and followed along the coast until 
we came to a great Cape* which was most difficult to 
double, for the currents were so strong we could make no 
headway. 

Then the Pilot, Alaminos, said to the General, that it 
was no use trying to go further in that direction, and gave 
many reasons for his opinion. So counsel was taken as to 
what had best be done, and it was settled that we should 
return to Cuba. One reason for this was that the rains* 
had already begun, and we were short of provisions, and 
one ship was leaking badly. However, the Captains were 
not of one mind, for Juan de Grijalva said that he wanted 

^ Orozco y Berra says, in a note (page 55), that this Rio de Canoas 
is the Rio Tanhuijo, 21 deg. 15 mins. 48 sees. N. lat. 

* Punta Majahua or Cabo Rojo. 

5 Inviemo (winter) is the word in the text ; it must here mean the 
rainy season. 




THE EXPEDITION RETURNS. 6l 

to form a settlement, and Alonzo de Ávila, and Francisco 
de Montejo objected, saying that they would not be able 
to hold out against the great number of warriors which the 
country contained, moreover, all of us soldiers were 
thoroughly tired of seafaring. 

So we turned round and set all sail before the wind, 
and aided by the currents, in a few days we reached the 
mouth of the great Rio de Coatzacoalcos, but we could 
not enter it on account of unfavourable weather, and going 
close in shore we entered the Rio de Tonalá, to which we 
gave the name of San Anton. There we careened one of 
the ships which was making water fast, for on entering the 
river she had struck on the bar where the water is very 
shallow. 

While we were repairing the ship many Indians came 
in a most friendly manner from the town of Tonalá, which 
is about a league distant, and brought maize bread, and 
fish and fruit, and gave them to us with great good will. 
The captain showed them much attention and ordered 
them to be given white and green beads, and made signs 
to them that they should bring gold for barter and we 
would give them our goods in exchange ; so they brought 
jewels of low grade gold, and we gave them beads in 
return. People came also from Coatzacoalcos and the 
other towns in the neighbourhood and brought jewelry, 
but this did not amount to anything. 

Besides these things for barter, the Indians of that 
province usually brought with them highly polished 
copper axes with painted wooden handles, as though 
for show or as a matter of elegance, and we thought 
that they were made of inferior gold, and began to barter 
for them, and in three days we had obtained more than 
six hundred, and we were very well contented thinking 
that they were made of debased gold, and the Indians 
were even more contented with their beads, but it was no 



62 THE AUTHOR SOWS ORANGE SEEDS. 

good to either party, for the axes were made of copper, 
and the beads were valueless. One sailor had bought 
seven axes, and was very well pleased with them.* 

I also remember that a soldier named Bartolomé Pardo, 
went to one of the Idol Houses which stood on a hill, 
(which as I have already said are called Cues, which means 
houses of the Gods) and in that house he found many 
Idols, and copal, which is a resin used as incense, and 
stone knives used for sacrifices and circumcision, and in a 
wooden chest he found many articles of gold, such as 
diadems and necklaces, and two Idols and some hollow 
beads. The soldier took the gold for himself and the 
other Idols and offerings he brought to the captain. 
However, someone had seen what was done, and reported 
it to Grijalva, and he wanted to take the gold from the 
soldier, but we begged that it might be left to him, as he 
was a respectable man, so after the Royal Fifth had been 
taken for His Majesty, the rest was given back to the 
poor soldier, and it was worth about one hundred and fifty 
dollars.* 



^ The Alonzo Remón Edition says that he bought them secretly, 
** and it seems that another sailor told this to the captain, and he 
ordered them to be given up, but as we all pleaded for him, thinking 
that the axes were gold, the captain gave them back again." 

• In the original MSS. the following passage is blotted out : — 
I sowed the seeds of some oranges near to another Idol house, and 
it happened thus : —There were so many mosquitos near the river 
that ten of us soldiers went up to sleep in a lofty Idol house, and close 
by that house I sowed the seeds which I had brought from Cuba, for 
there was a rumour that we were coming back to settle, they came up 
very well, for it seems that the Papas, when they saw that they were 
plants differing from those they knew, protected them and watered 
theni and kept them free from weeds ; and all the oranges in that 
P>;ov"^ce are the descendants of these plants. I know well that it 
will be said that these old tales have nothing to do with my 
history, so I must leave off telling them.—G. G. 

The Alonzo Remón Edition adds :— And I have called this to mind 
because these were the first oranges planted in New Spain. After the 
fall of Mexico, when the towns subject to Coatzacoalcos had been 
pacified, this was looked on as the best province, being the best 
situated in all New Spain, both on account of the mines it possessed 



Series II. Vol. XXllI. 




Facsimile (reduced) of Title-Page of 

HERRERA'S ** DESCRIPCION," 1601. 
Showing Mexican Gods, Temples, etc. 



Reproduced and printed for the Hakluyt Society by Donald Macbeth, Í90S- 



THE RETURN TO SANTIAGO DE CUBA. 63 

We left the Indians of those provinces well contented, 
and going on board ship again, we went on our way 
towards Cuba,^ and in forty-five days, sometimes with fair 
weather and at other times with bad weather, we arrived 
at Santiago de Cuba where Diego Velasquez was residing, 
and he gave us a very good reception. 

When the Governor saw the gold that we brought, 
which was worth four thousand dollars, and with that 
which had already been brought by Pedro de Alvarado, 
amounted in all to twenty thousand dollars, (and some 
say that it was more) he was well contented. Then 
the officers of the King took the Royal Fifth, but 
when the six hundred axes which we thought were low 
grade gold were brought out, they were all rusty like 
copper which they proved to be, and there was a good 
laugh at us, and they made great fun of our trading. 

The Governor was very pleased at all this, but he did 
not seem to be on good terms with his kinsman Grijalva, 
and he had no cause for it, merely that Francisco de 
Montejo and Pedro de Alvarado were not on good terms 
with Grijalva, and Alonzo de Avila added to the trouble. 
As soon as these squabbles were over there began to be 
talk of sending another fleet, and gossip as to who would 
be chosen as captain, but I will leave this for the present 
and will tell how Diego Velasquez sent to Spain to 
petition His Majesty to give him a commission to trade 
and to conquer, settle and apportion, the lands which had 
been discovered. 

as well as for its good harbour, for it was a land both rich in gold, 
and in pasture for cattle. For this reason it was settled by the 
principal Conquistadores of Mexico, of whom I was one. So I went 
to look for my orange trees and transplanted them and they turned 
out very well. 

* The author of the Itinerario says that they touched at Campeche 
and secured enough maize, water and firewood to supply them for the 
remainder of the voyage. 



BOOK 11. 



THE EXPEDITION 
UNDER HERNANDO CORTES. 

THE VOYAGE. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

How Diego Velasquez sent to Spain to petition His Majesty to 
grant him a commission, to trade with, and conquer the 
country, and to settle and apportion the land as soon as peace 
was established. 



LTHOUGH it may seem to the reader 
that in relating what I now call to 
mind, I am wandering far away from 
my story, nevertheless it seems to me 
proper that, before I begin to tell 
about the valiant and energetic Captain 
Cortes, certain things should be mentioned, both for 
reasons which will be apparent later on, and because 
when two or three events happen at the same time, one 
cannot relate them together, but only that one which 
falls into its place in the story. 

The fact is that when the captain, Pedro de Alvarado 
arrived at Santiago de Cuba with the gold from the lands 
which we had discovered, as I have already related, Diego 
Velasquez was in fear lest, before he could make his 
report to His Majesty, some court favourite should rob 




DIEGO VELASQUEZ REPORTS TO THE EMPEROR. 65 

him of his reward, and ask it from His Majesty for him- 
self. For this reason he sent to Spain his chaplain, named 
Benito Martinez, a man well skilled in business, with the 
evidence and letters for Don Juan Rodriguez de Fonseca, 
Bishop of Burgos, and Archbishop of Rosano, for such are 
his titles, and to the Licentiate, Luis Zapata, and to the 
Secretary, Lope de Conchillos, who at th^t time looked 
after the Affairs of the Indies. Diego Velasquez was the 
very humble servant of them all, especially of the Bishop, 
and he gave them Indian townships in the Island of Cuba, 
so that their inhabitants might extract gold from the 
mines for them, and for this reason they were ready to 
do much for Diego Velasquez. 

At this time His Majesty was away in Flanders. Velas- 
quez also sent to these gentlemen, just now mentioned 
by me, some of the jewels of gold which we had obtained 
by barter. Now everything that was done by the Royal 
Council of the Indies was done by the orders of these 
gentlemen, and that which Diego Velasquez wished to 
have arranged was, that he should be given authority to 
trade with, conquer and settle all this land which he 
had recently discovered, and a'hy that he might there- 
after discover. He said in his reports and letters that 
he had spent many thousands of gold dollars in the 
discovery. So the Chaplain, Benito Martinez, went to 
Spain and succeeded in obtaining all that he asked for, 
and even more, for he brought back a decree appointing 
Diego Velasquez, Adelantado of the Island of Cuba. 
Although what I have here stated was already settled, 
the despatches did not arrive before the valiant Cortes 
had already sailed with a fresh fleet. I n^ist leave this 
matter here, both the despatches of which Benito 
Martinez was the bearer, and the fleet of the captain 
Cortes, and state that while writing this story I have 
seen the chronicles written by the historian. Francisco 

F 



66 THE ERRORS IN THE HISTORIES 

Lopes de Gómara, and those of the Doctor Yllescas and 
of Jovio, in which they treat of the conquest of New 
Spain. I feel bound to declare that, wherever it appears 
to contradict the others, my story represents events 
clearly and truly, and runs very diffeVently from what 
the historians I have named have written. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 



Concerning some errors and other things written by the Historians 
Gómara and Yllescas about affairs in New Spain. 

While I was writing this story, I saw by chance, what 
had been written by Gómara, Yllescas and Jovio, about 
the conquest of Mexico and New Spain, and when I had 
read their accounts and saw and appreciated their polished 
style, and thought how rudely and lamely my story was ^ 
told, I stopped writing it, seeing that such good histories 
already existed. Being in this perplexed state of mind, I 
began to look into the arguments and discourses which 
are told in these books, and I saw that from beginning to 
end they did not tell correctly what took place in New 
Spain. When they begin to write about the great cities, 
and the great number of the inhabitants, they are as ready 
to write eighty thousand as eight thousand. Then about 
the great slaughter which they say we committed : — As 
we were only four hundred and fifty soldiers who marched 
to that war, we had enough to do to defend ourselves from 
being killed or defeated and carried off ; and even had the 
Indians been craven cowards, we could not have committed 
all the slaughter attributed to us, more particularly as 
the Indians were very bold warriors who had cotton 
armour which shielded their bodies, and were armed with 
bows, arrows, shields, long lances, and two-handled stone- 
edged swords, which cut better than oqr swords did. 



BY GOMARA, YLLESCAS AND JOVIO. 67 

Nevertheless, the historians say that we made as great a 
slaughter and committed as great cruelties as did Alaric, 
that bravest of kings, and the haughty warrior Attila, on 
the battlefields of Catalonia. To go back to my story, they 
say that we destroyed and burnt many cities and temples, 
that is their Cues, and in saying this, they seem to think 
that they are giving pleasure ta those who read their 
histories, and they do not understand when they write, 
that the conquerors themselves, and the inquisitive readers, 
who know what really took place, could tell them clearly 
that if they write other histories in the way they have 
written that of New Spain, such history will be worthless. 
The amusing part of it is, that they exalt some captains, 
and belittle others, and they speak of some, who were not 
even present at the conquest, as though they were there, 
and they make many other statements of equal value, but 
there are so many matters about which they are ignorant, 
that I cannot note them all. But there is one thing that 
they say worse than all and that is that Cortes sent secret 
orders to scuttle the ships, on the contrary, it was on the 
distinct advice of most of the other soldiers and my own, 
that he sent to have the ships sunk without any conceal- 
ment whatever, aitd it was done so that the sailors who 
were in them might help to keep watch and make war. 
Indeed, in all they write, they speak with prejudice, so 
why should I go on dipping my pen to mention each item 
separately, it is merely wasting ink and paper, moreover 
I should say it badly, for I have got no style. 

Let us leave this discussion and get back to my theme. 
After having carefully examined all that I have said as to 
the nonsense that has been written about the affairs of 
New Spain, I continued writing my own story, for it is 
the truest politeness and the most courteous style to tell 
the truth in what one writes, and knowing this, I made up 
my mind to carry out my plan, with such embellishments 

F 2 



68 THE AUTHOR CONTINUES HIS STORY. 

and discourses as will be seen further on, so that the 
conquest of New Spain may be brought to light and may 
be clearly seen in the way it ought to be seen. 

I wish to return to my story pen in hand as a good 
pilot carries his lead in hand at sea, looking out for shoals 
ahead, when he knows that they will be met with, so will 
I do in speaking of the errors of the historians, but t shall 
not mention them all, for if one had to follow them item 
by item, the trouble of discarding the rubbish would be 
greater than that of gathering in the harvest 

I say that upon this story of mine the historians may 
build up and give as much praise as pleases them to the 
valiant captain Cortes and to the sturdy Conquistadores. 
It was a great enterprise that was accomplished by our 
hands, and what historians may write about it, we, who 
were eye witnesses will certify when it is true, as we now 
certify to the errors, and as so much daring and zeal has 
been shown in writing falsely and with prejudice, we 
appreciate how holy and blessed is the truth, and that all 
that is said against it is cursed. 

Moreover it appears that Gömara^ was inspired to write 
with such laudation of Cortes, for we look upon it as 
certain that his palms were greased, for he dedicated his 
history to the present Marquis, the son of Cortes, insisting 
on his right so to dedicate and recommend it before our 
lord the King, and the members of the Royal Council of 
the Indies ought to have had the mistakes erased that 
are written down in his books. 



1 Alonzo Remón Edition adds :-— " Not only did Gómara write down 
so many mistakes and things that are not true, but he misled many 
writers and historians who since his time have written about the 
affairs of New Spain, such as the Doctor Yllescas and Pablo Jovio 
who copy his very words." 



t>LANS FOR A tHlRD EXJPEDITÍON. 69 



CHAPTER XIX. 

How we came again with another fleet to the newly discovered lands 
with the valiant and energetic Don Hernando Cortes (who was 
afterwards Marques del Valle) as captain of the fleet, and the 
attempts that were made to prevent his going in command. 

After the return of the Captain Juan de Grijalva to 
Cuba, when the Governor Diego Velasquez understood 
how rich were these newly discovered lands, he ordered 
another fleet, much larger than the former one to be sent 
off, and he had already collected in the Port of Santiago, 
where he resided, ten ships, four of them were those in 
which we had returned with Juan de Grijalva, which had 
at once been careened, and the other six had been got 
together from other ports in the Island. He had them 
furnished with provisions, consisting of Cassava bread and 
sáilt pork, for at that time there were neither sheep nor 
cattle in. the Island of Cuba, as it had been only recently 
settled. These provisions were only to last until we 
arrived at Havana, for it was at that port that we were 
to take in our stores, as was afterwards done. 

I must cease talking of this and tell about the disputes 
which arose over the choice of a captain for the expedition. 
There were many debates and much opposition, for some 
gentleman said that Vasco Porcallo, a near relation of the 
Conde de Feria, should be captain, but Diego Velasquez 
feared that he would rise against him with the fleet, for 
he was very daring ; others said that Agustin Bermudez 
or Antonio Velasquez Borrejo, or Bernadino Velasquez, 
kinsman of Diego Velasquez should go in command. 

Most of us soldiers who were there said that we should 
prefer to go again under Juan de Grijalva, for he was 
a good captain, and there was no fault to be found either 
with his person or his capacity for command. 

While things were going on in the way I have related, 



fo hernÍndo cortís chosbn 

two great favourites of Diego Velasquez named Andres 
de Duero, the Governor's Secretary, and Amador de Lares, 
His Majesty's accountant, secretly formed a partnership 
with a gentleman named Hernando Cortes, a native of 
Medellin, who held a grant of Indians in the Island. A 
short while before, Cortes had married a lady named 
Catalina Juarez la Marcayda ; this lac^j^k was sister of a 
certain Juan Juarez who after the conquest of New Spain 
was a settler at Mexico. As far as I know, and from what 
others say, it was a love match. On this matter of the 
marriage other persons who saw it have had much to say, 
and for that reason I will not touch any more on this 
delicate subject. 

I will go on to tell about this partnership, it came about 
in this manner: — These two great favourites of Velasquez 
agreed that they would get him to appoint Cortes Captain 
General of the whole fleet, and that they would divide 
between the three of them, the spoil of gold, silver and 
jewels which might fall to Cortes* share. For secretly 
Diego Velasquez was sending to trade and not to form 
a settlement, as was apparent afterwards from the instruc- 
tions given about it, although it was announced and 
published that the expedition was for the purpose of 
founding a settlement. 

When this arrangement had been made, Duero and the 
accountant went to work in such a way with Diego 
Velasquez, and addressed such honied words to him, 
praising Cortes highly, as the very man for the position 
of Captain, as in addition to being energetic he knew how 
to command and ensure respect, and as one who would be 
faithful in everything entrusted to him, both in regard to 
the fleet and in everything else, (pointing out too, that 
he was his godson, for Velasquez was his sponsor when 
Cortes married Dofia Catalina Juarez), that they persuaded 
him to choose Cortes as Captain General 



TO LEAD TÍtE NEW ÉXPEblTION. ^l 

Andres de Duero, the Governor's Secretary, drew up 
the documents in very good ink^ as the proverb says, in 
%the way Cortes wished with very ample powers. 

When the appointment was made public, some persons 
were pleased and others annoyed. 

One Sunday when Diego Velasquez went to Mass, — and 
as he was Gof^nor he was accompanied by the most 
distinguished persons in the town, — he placed Hernando 
Cortes on his right hand so as to pay him honour. A 
buffoon, called the mad Cervantes, ran in front of Diego 
Velasquez, making grimaces and cracking jokes and he 
cried out — 

"The parade of my friend Diego, Diego, 

" Who then is this captain of your choice ? 

'* He comes from Medellin in Estramadura 

" A very valiant captain indeed 

" Have a care lest he run off with the fleet 

" For all judge him a man to take care of his own." 

And he cried out other nonsense, all of it somewhat 
malicious. And as he would go on shouting in this way, 
Andres de Duero who was walking near Diego Velasquez, 
gave the buffoon a cuff and said "Silence thou crazy 
drunkard, and don't be such a rogue, for we are well 
aware that these malicious sayings, passed off as wit, are 
not made up by thee," and still the madman ran on, 
notwithstanding the cuffs, saying, " Viva, Viva, the parade 
of my friend Diego and his daring Captain Cortes, I swear 
friend Diego that so as not to see thee weeping over the 
bad bargain thou hast made this day, I wish to go with 
Cortes to these rich lands." There is no doubt that some 
kinsman of the Governor had given gold pieces to the 
buffoon to utter these malicious sayings, passing them off 
as witty. However, this all came true, and it is said that 
madmen do sometimes hit the mark in their speeches. 

^ De muy buena tinta » most efficiently. . 



72 PREPARATIONS FOR THE EXPEDITION 

Truly Hernando Cortes was chosen to exalt our holy 
faith and to serve his Majesty, as I will tell later on. 

Before going any further I wish to say that the valiant 
and energetic Hernando Cortes was a gentleman by birth 
(hijo-d'algo) by four lines of descent. The first through 
the Cortéses, for so his father Martin Cortes was named, 
the second through the Pizarros, the third through the 
Monroys and the fourth through the Altamiranos. Al- 
though he was such a valiant, energetic and daring 
captain, I will not from now on, call him by any of these 
epithets of valiant, or energetic, nor will I speak of him as 
Marques del Valle, but simply as Hernando Cortes. For 
the name Cortes alone was held in as high respect 
throughout the Indies as well as in Spain, as was the 
name of Alexander in Macedonia, and those of Julius 
Caesar and Pompey and Scipio among the Romans, and 
Hannibal among the Carthaginians, or in our own Castille 
the name of Gonzalo Hernandez, the Great Captain. And 
the valiant Cortes himself was better pleased not to be 
called by lofty titles but simply by his name, and so I 
will call him for the future. And now I must cease 
talking of this, and relate in the next chapter what he 
undertook and accomplished about the preparation of his 
fleet. 



CHAPTER XX. 

How Cortes prepared and continued the arrangements necessary 
for the dispatch of the fleet. 

As soon as Hernando Cortes had been appointed General 
in the way I have related, he began to search for all sorts 
of arms, guns, powder and crossbows and every kind of 
warlike stores which he could get together, and all sorts of 
articles to be used for barter, and other things necessary 
for the expedition. 



Under hernando cortés. 73 

Moreover he began to adorn himself and be more careful 
of his appearance than before, and he wore a plume 
of feathers with a medal, and a gold chain, and a velvet 
cloak trimmed with knots of gold, in fact he looked like a 
gallant and courageous Captain. However, he had no 
money to defray the expenses I have spoken about, for 
at that time he was very poor and much in debt, although 
he had a good encomienda of Indians who were getting 
him a return from his gold mines, but he spent all of 
it on his person and on finery for his wife whom he had 
recently married, and on entertaining some guests who had 
come to visit him. For he was affable in his manner and 
a good talker, and he had twice been chosen Alcalde of 
the town of Santiago Baracoa where he had settled, and 
in that country it is esteemed a great honour to be chosen 
as Alcalde, 

When some merchant friends of his named Jaime Tria, 
Jerónimo Tria and Pedro de Jerez saw that he had 
obtained this command as Captain General, they lent 
him four thousand gold dollars in coin and gave him 
merchandise worth another four thousand dollars secured 
on his Indians and estates. Then he ordered two standards 
and banners to be made, worked in gold with the royal 
arms and a cross on each side with a legend which said> 
" Comrades, let us follow the sign of the holy Cross with 
true faith, and through it we shall conquer." And he 
ordered a proclamation to be made with the sound of 
drums and trumpets in the name of His Majesty and 
by Diego Velasquez in the King's name, and in his own as 
Captain General, to the effect that whatsoever person might 
wish to go in his company to the newly discovered lands 
to conquer them and to settle there, should receive his 
share of the gold, silver and riches which might be gained 

* Alcalde — Mayor. 



74 PREPARATIONS FOR THE EXPEDITlOÍí 

and an encomienda of Indians after the country had been 
pacified, and that to do these things Diego Velasquez 
held authority from His Majesty. 

Although he put in the proclamation this about the 
authority of Our Lord the King, the Chaplain, Benito 
Martinez, had not yet arrived from Spain .with the Com- 
mission which Diego Velasquez had sent him to obtain, 
as I have already mentioned in a former chapter. 

When this news was known throughout Cuba, and 
Cortes had written to all his friends in the different 
towns begging them to get ready to come with him on 
this expedition, some of them sold their farms so as to 
buy arms and horses, others began to prepare cassava 
bread and to salt pork for stores, and to make quilted 
cotton armour, and they got ready what was necessary as 
well as they could. 

We assembled at Santiago de Cuba, whence we set out 
with the fleet more than three hundred and fifty soldiers 
in number. From the house of Velasquez there came 
Diego de Ordás, the chief Mayordomo, whom Velasquez 
himself sent with orders to keep his eyes open and see 
that no plots were hatched in the fleet, for he was always 
distrustful of Cortes although he concealed his fears. 
There came also Francisco de Morla and an Escobar, 
whom we called The Page, and a Heredia, and Juan 
Ruano and Pedro Escudero, and Martin Ramos de Lares, 
and many others who were friends and followers of Diego 
Velasquez ; and I place myself last on the list for I also 
came from the house of Diego Velasquez, for he was my 
kinsman. 

I have put down here the names of these soldiers from 
memory, later on, at the proper time and place I will 
record all those who went in the fleet whose names I 
can call to mind, and say from what part of Spain they 
came. 



ÍÍÍÍpER HÉRÍÍANDO CORTÉS. 7Í 

Cortés worked hard to get his fleet under way and 
hastened on his preparations, for already envy and malice 
had taken possession of the relations of Diego Velasquez 
who were affronted because their kinsman neither trusted 
them nor took any notice of them and because he had 
given charge and command to Cortes, knowing that he 
had looked upon him as a great enemy only a short time 
before, on account of his marriage, already mentioned by 
me ; so they went about grumbling at their kinsman 
Diego Velasquez and at Cortes, and by every means in 
their power they worked on Diego Velasquez to induce 
him to revoke the commission. 

Now Cortes was advised of all this, and for that reason 
never left the Governor's side, and always showed himself 
to be his zealous servant, and kept on telling him that, 
God willing, he was going to make him a very illustrious 
and wealthy gentleman in a very short time. Moreover 
Andres de Duero was always advising Cortes to hasten 
the embarkation of himself and his soldiers, for Diego 
Velasquez was already changing his mind owing to the 
importunity of his family. 

When Cortes knew this he sent orders to his wife that 
all provisions of food which he wished to take and any 
other gifts (such as women usually give to their husbands 
when starting on such an expedition) should be sent at 
once and placed on board ship. 

He had already had a proclamation made that on that 
day by nightfall all ships. Captains, pilots and soldiers 
should be on board and no one should remain on shore. 
When Cortes had seen all his company embarked he went 
to take leave of Diego Velasquez, accompanied by his 
great friends and many other gentlemen, and all the most 
distinguished citizens of that town. 

After many demonstrations and embraces of Cortes by 
the Governor, and of the Governor by Cortes, he took his 



;6 THE FLEET SAILS FROM SANTIAGO DE CUBA, 

leave. The next day very early after having heard Mass 
we went to our ships, and Diego Velasquez himself 
accompanied us, and again they embraced with many fair 
speeches one to the other until we set sail. 

A few days later, in fine weather, we reached the Port 
of Trinidad where we brought up in the harbour and 
went ashore, and nearly all the citizens of that town came 
out to meet us ; and entertained us well. 

Here in this story will be seen all the opposition which 
Cortes met with, and how what happened differed entirely 
from the account given by Gömara in his history. 



Note. — This account differs very considerably from that given 
by Las Casas (Lib. Ill, cap. cxv). It appears that Diego Velasquez 
had already determined to take the command from Cortes, *' at once 
on the very night that he became aware of what was going on, as soon ' 
as Diego Velasquez was in bed, and all those who belonged to [him,] 
Cortes, had left the Palace, he went in the profound silence of the 
night in the utmost haste to awaken the rest of his friends telling 
them that it was advisable to embark at once. Taking with him a 
company sufficient to defend his person, he immediately went 
off to the slaughter house and, although it troubled the contractor 
who had to supply the whole town with meat, he took it all away 
without leaving a single cow, pig, or sheep, and had it carried to the 
ships, exclaiming, but not out loud, for it might perhaps have cost him 
his life, that they could lay the blame on him [Cortes] for not supplying 
meat to the town. Then Cortes took off a small golden chain that he 
wore round his neck and gave it to the contractor or butcher, and 
this Cortes told me himself, 

" Cortes at once went on board ship with all the people that he 
could arouse without noise. Many of the people who had agreed to 
go with him and who really went were already on board. 

" When he was gone either the butcher or others who knew of his 
departure advised Diego Velasquez that Cortes was gone and was 
already on board ship. Diego Velasquez got up and mounted his 
horse, and all the people of the city, in a state of astonishment, 
accompanied him to the landing place by the sea at daybreak. 
When Cortes saw him he ordered a boat to be got ready with 
cannon, guns, muskets and crossbows, and all the necessary arms, 
and accompanied by the men he could trust best, with his magistrate's 
wand [in his hand] he came within crossbow shot of the land and 



CORTÍS AT TRINIDAD. ^^ 

there stopped. Diego Velasquez said to him ' How is it, compadre,^ 
that you are going off like this ? Is this the right way to take leave 
of me?' Cortes replied *Senor, may your Excellency pardon me, 
but these things and the like are done before they are thought about, 
I am at your Excellency's orders.' Diego Velasquez had nothing to 
say when he saw his infidelity and shamelessness. Cortes ordered 
the boat's head to be turned and went back to the ships, and ordered the 
sails to be hoisted in all haste [and] on the i8th Nov. 1518 [he set 
out] with very little food for the ships were not yet fully laden." 



CHAPTER XXI. 



What Cortes did when he arrived at the town of Trinidad and con- 
cerning the soldiers who there joined him to go in his company, 
and other things that happened. 

The leading inhabitants of that town soon provided 
quarters for Cortes and all of us among their neighbours. 
Cortes was lodged in the house of Captain Juan de 
Grijalva, and he ordered his standard and the Royal 
pennant to be set up in front of his quarters and issued a 
proclamation as he had done in Santiago, and ordered 
search to be made for all sorts of arms, and food and other 
necessaries to be purchased. 

From that town there came to join us five brothers, 
namely Pedro de Alvarado and Jorge de Alvarado, and 
Gonzalo and Gomez, and Juan de Alvarado the elder, who 
was a bastard. The Captain Pedro de Alvarado has often 
been mentioned by me already. There also joined us 
from this town Alonzo de Avila, who went as a Captain 
in Grijalva's expedition, and Juan de Escalante and Pedro 
Sanchez Farfan, and Gonzalo Mejia who later on became 
treasurer in Mexico, and a certain Baena and Juanes of 
Fuenterrabia, and Lares, the good horseman, so called 
because there was another Lares, and Cristobal de Olid, 
the Valiant, who was Maestro de Campo during the 

^ Compadre = friend, crony. 



78 SETTLERS FROM SANTISPIRITUS 

Mexican wars, and Ortis the Musician, and Caspar 
Sanchez, nephew of the treasurer of Cuba, and Diego de 
Pineda or Pinedo, and Alonzo Rodriguez, who owned 
some rich gold mines, and Bartolomé Garcia and other 
gentlemen whose names I do not remember, all persons of 
quality. 

From Trinidad Cortes wrote to the town of Santispiritus 
which was eighteen leagues distant, informing all the 
inhabitants that he was setting out on this expedition in 
His Majesty's service, adding fair words and inducements 
to attract many persons of quality who had settled in that 
town, among them Alonzo Hernándes Puertocarrero cousin 
of the Count of Medelh'n, and Gonzalo de Sandoval who 
became later on, in Mexico, Alguazil Mayor} and for eight 
months was Governor of New Spain and Juan Velasquez de 
Leon came, a kinsman of Diego Velasquez, and Rodrigo 
Reogel, and Gonzalo Lopes de Jimena, and his brother, and 
Juan Sedefto also came. This Juan Sedefto was a settler in 
the town, I mention this because we had two others of the 
name Juan Sedefto in the fleet All these distinguished 
persons whom I have named came from the town of Santi- 
spiritus to Trinidad where Cortes was staying, and when 
he heard that they were coming he went out to meet them 
with all the soldiers of his company and received them 
with great cordiality and they treated him with the highest 
respect. 

All these settlers whom I have named possessed farms 
near the town where they made Cassava bread and kept 
herds of swine, and each one endeavoured to contribute as 
much food as he could. 

We continued to enlist soldiers and to buy horses, which 
at that time were both scarce and costly, and as that 
gentleman already mentioned by me, Alonzo Hernándes 

1 Chief Constable. 



JOIN THE EXPEDITION. 79 

Puertocarrero, neither possessed a horse nor the where- 
withal to buy one, Hernando Cortes bought him a gray 
mare, and paid for it with some of the golden knots off the 
velvet cloak which as I have said he had had made at 
Santiago de Cuba. 

At that very time a ship arrived in port from Havana, 
which a certain Juan Sedefto, a settler at Havana, was 
•taking, freighted with Cassava bread and salt pork to sell 
at some gold mines near Santiago de Cuba. 

Juan Sedefto landed and went to pay his respects to 
Cortes, and after a long conversation Cortes bought the 
ship and the pork and bread on credit, and it all came 
with us. So we already had eleven ships and thank God 
all was going well with us. 

Meanwhile Diego Velasquez had sent letters and com- 
mands for the fleet to be detained and Cortes to be sent 
to him as a prisoner. 



CHAPTER XXH. 



How the Governor Diego Velasquez sent two of his servants post 
haste to the town of Trinidad with orders and authority to cancel 
the appointment of Cortes, detain the fleet, arrest Cortes and 
send him as a prisoner to Santiago. 

I MUST go back a little from our story, to say that after 
we had set out from Santiago de Cuba with all the ships, 
in the way I have already related, so many things were 
said to Diego Velasquez against Cortes, that he was forced 
to change his mind, for they told him that Cortes was 
already in rebellion, and that he left the port by stealth, 
and that he had been heard to say that although Diego 
Velasquez and his relations might regret it, he intended to 
be Captain and that was the reason why he had embarked 



80 DIEGO VELASQUEZ ATTEMPTS 

all his soldiers by night, so that if any attempt were made 
to detain him by force he might set sail ; they also said 
that Andres de Duero, the Secretary, and the Accountant 
Amador de Lares had deceived Diego Velasquez on 
account of arrangements made between them and Cortes. 
Those who took the leading part in persuading Diego 
Velasquez to revoke the authority he had given to Cortes 
were some members of the Velasquez family and an old 
man named Juan Millan whom some called the astrologer, 
but others said he had a touch of madness because he 
acted without reflection, and this old man kept repeating 
to Diego Velásques " Take care, Sir, for Cortes will take 
vengeance on you for putting him in prison,* and as he Is 
sly and determined he will ruin you' if you do not prevent 
it at once." 

And Velasquez listened to these speeches, and was 
always haunted by suspicions, so without delay he sent 
two messengers whom he trusted, with orders and instruc- 
tions to Francisco Verdugo, the Chief Alcalde of Trinidad, 
who was his brother-in-law, and wrote letters to other 
friends and relations, to the effect that on no account 
should the fleet be allowed to sail, and he said in his 
orders that Cortes should be detained or taken prisoner as 
he was no longer its captain, for he had revoked his 
commission and given it to Vasco Porcallo. The messengers 
also carried letters to Diego de Ordás and Francisco de 
Morla and other dependents of his begging them not to 
allow the fleet to sail. 

When Cortes heard of this, he spoke to Ordás and 
Francisco Verdugo and to all the soldiers and settlers at 
Trinidad, whom he thought would be against him and in 
favour of the instructions, and he made such speeches and 



^ This refers to an earlier incident in the relations between Corté$ 
and Dien^o Velasquez. 



TO DEPRIVE CORTáS OF THE COMMAND. 8 1 

promises to them that he brought them over to his side. 
Diego Ordás himself spoke at once to Francisco Verdugo, 
the Alcalde Mayor advising him to have nothing to do 
with the affair but to hush it up, and bade him note that 
up to that time they had seen no change in Cortes, on 
the contrary that he showed himself to be a faithful 
servant of the Governor, and that if Velasquez wished to 
impute any evil to him in order to deprive him of the 
command of the fleet, it was as well to remember that 
Cortes had many men of quality among his friends, who 
were unfriendly to Velasquez because he had not given 
them good grants of Indians. In addition to this, that 
Cortes had a large body of soldiers with him and was very 
powerful and might sow strife in the town, and perhaps 
the soldiers might sack the town and plunder it, and do 
even worse damage. 

So the matter was quietly dropped and one of the 
messengers who brought the letters and instructions, named 
Pedro Lazo de la Vega joined our company, and by the 
other messenger Cortes sent a letter to Diego Velasquez 
written in a very friendly manner, saying that he was 
amazed at His Honour having come to such a decision, 
that his desire was to serve God and his Majesty, and 
to obey him as His Majesty's representative, and that he 
prayed him not to pay any more attention to what was 
said by the gentlemen of his family, nor to change his 
mind on account of the speeches of such an old lunatic 
as Juan Millan. He also wrote to all his friends and 
especially to his partners Duero and the Treasurer. 

When these letters had been written Cortes ordered all 
the soldiers to polish up their arms, and he ordered the 
blacksmiths in the town to make head pieces, and the 
cross bowmen to overhaul their stores and make arrows, 
and he also sent for the two blacksmiths and persuaded 
them to accompany us, which they did. We were ten days 

G 



82 THE VOYAGE ALONG THE SOUTH COAST OF CUBA. 

in that town. Here I will leave off and go on to tell how 
we embarked for Havana. 

However, I wish first to point out to my readers how 
different this is from the story of Francisco Gómara who 
says that Diego Velasquez sent to Ordás telling him to 
invite Cortes to dinner on board a ship, and then to carry 
him off as a prisoner to Santiago, and makes other state- 
ments calculated to mislead in his history, but, so as 
not to become prolix, I will leave them to the judgment of 
interested readers. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 



How the Captain Hernando Cortes with all the soldiers sailed 
along the south coast to the port of Havana,^ and how another 
ship was sent along the north coast to the same port, and 
what else took place. 

When Cortes saw that there was nothing more to be 
done at the town of Trinidad he summoned all the 
soldiers who had assembled there to go with him * * 
? * * (Pedro) de Alvarado that he should go by 
land to Havana^ » « » » » to pick up some 
soldiers who lived on farms along the road, and I went 
in his company. Cortes also sent a gentleman named 
Juan de Escalante, a great friend of his, in a ship along 
the north coast, and he sent all the horses by land. When 



^ This was on the south coast, not the present port of Havana on 
the north coast, which must have been about thirty miles distant. 
Cortes and his fleet sailed along the south coast of Cuba, and the 
" San Sebastian '' and the vessel commanded by Juan de Escalante 
were the only vessels on the north side of the Island. 

* The Alonzo Remón edition says " he summoned all the gentle- 
men and soldiers who had assembled there to go with him either to 
embark on the ships which were in port on the south coast, or if they 
preferred it to go by land to Havana with Pedro de Alvarado who was 
going to pick up some soldiers who lived on farms along the road." 



THE FLAGSHIP RUNS AGROUND. 83 

all this had been done Cortes went on board the flagship 
to set sail with all the fleet for Havana. 

It appears that the ships of the Convoy did not see the 
flagship in which Cortes had embarked, for it was night 
time and they went on to the port [of Havana]. We also 
arrived by land at the town of Havana with Pedro de 
Alvarado, and the ship in which Juan de Escalante had 
come along the north coast had already arrived, and all 
the horses which had been sent by land, but Cortes did 
not appear, and no one knew where he was delayed. 
Five days passed without news of his ship and we began 
to wonder whether he had been lost on the Jardinés^ ten 
or twelve miles from Havana near the Isle of Pines where 
there are many shallows. We all agfreed that three of the 
smaller vessels should go in search of Cortes, and in pre- 
paring the vessels and in debates whether this or the other 
man — Pedro or Sancho — should go, two more days went 
by and Cortes did not appear. Then parties began to be 
formed, and we all played the game of " Who shall be 
Captain until Cortes comes?" And the man who took 
the lead in this was Diego de Ordás, as the chief Mayor- 
domo of Velasquez, who had been sent by the Governor 
merely to look after the fleet and see that there should be 
no mutiny. 

Let us leave this subject and return to Cortes who, as I 
have already said, had embarked on the largest ship of 
the fleet, and in the neighbourhood of the Isle of Pines, or 
near the JardineSy where there are many shallows, the ship 
ran aground and remained there hard and fast and could 
not be floated. 

Cortes ordered all the cargo which could be removed to 
be taken ashore in the boat, for there was land near by 
where it could be stored, and when it was seen that the 
ship was floating and could be moved, she was taken into 
deeper water and was laden again with the cargo which 

G 2 



84 CORTES REACHES THE PORT OF HAVANA 

had been taken ashore, sail was then set and the voyage 
continued to the port of Havana. 

When Cortes arrived nearly all of us gentlemen and 
soldiers who were awaiting him were delighted at his 
coming, all except some who had hoped to be Captains, 
for the game of choosing captains came to an end. 

As soon as we had lodged Cortes in the house of Pedro 
Barba, who was the lieutenant of Diego Velasquez in that 
town, he ordered the standards to be brought out and 
placed in front of the buildings in which he was lodged 
and ordered proclamation to be made, as he had done 
before. 

From the Havana there came the Hidalgo Francisco 
Montejo very often mentioned by me, who after the con- 
quest of Mexico was appointed Governor and Adelantado 
of Yucatan, and there also came Diego de Soto of Toro 
who was Mayordomo to Cortes in Mexico, and a certain 
Angulo y Garcicaro, and Sebastian Rodriguez and a 
Pacheco and a somebody Gutierrez, and a Rójas (not 
Rójas el Rico) and a youth named Santa Clara, and two 
brothers called the Martinez del Freginal, and a Juan de 
Najara (I don't mean the deaf one who played Pelota^ in 
Mexico), all persons of quality, not counting other soldiers 
whose names I cannot remember. 

When Cortes beheld all these Hidalgos collected 
together he was greatly pleased. He sent a ship to 
the Cape of Guaniguanico, to an Indian town there, 
where they made Cassava bread and kept many pigs, to 
have her laden with salt pork, for the farm belonged to 
the Governor Diego Velasquez,^ and he sent Diego de Ordás 

' A ball game. 

* In a conversation with Las Casas in the year 1542, Cortes, 
speaking of this expedition, laughingly remarked, " A mi fé, anduve 
por alii como un gentil corsario." " By my faith 1 went about there 
like an excellent robber." (Las Casas, HisL de Indias, Lib. Ill, 
cap. cxvi). 



AND PREPARES TO LEAVE CUBA. 85 

who was the chief Mayordomo of the property of Velasquez 
in command of the ship, as he wished to get him out of 
the way, for he knew that Diego de Ordás did not show 
himself to be very well disposed towards him at the time 
when his ship went ashore near the Isle of Pines and the 
question arose as to who should be chosen captain. So in 
order to avoid disputes with him he sent Diego de Ordás 
off with orders that after freighting the ship with supplies 
of food, he should remain at the port of Guaniguanico 
until he was joined by the other ship which was going 
along the north coast, and then that the two should sail 
together for Cozumel, but that [in case of any change of 
plans] he would send Indians in canoes to advise him what 
was to be done. 

I must not forget to say that Francisco de Montejo and 
all the other settlers at Havana sent on board great stores 
of Cassava bread and salt pork, for other provisions were 
not to be had. 

Cortes now ordered all the artillery, which consisted of 
ten brass guns and some falconets, to be brought out of 
the ships, and gave them in charge of an artilleryman 
named Mesa, and of a levantine named Arbenga, and a 
certain Juan Catalan, with orders to have them thoroughly 
cleaned and tested, and to see that the balls and powder 
were in readiness, and he gave them wine and vinegar with 
which to clean them. He gave the gunners as a companion 
a certain Bartolomé de Usagre. He also ordered that the 
crossbows with their cords, nuts, and other necessaries 
should be overhauled, and that they should be tested at a 
target, so as to see how far each of them would carry. 

As in the country round Havana there is much cotton, 
we made well padded armour for ourselves, which is most 
necessary when fighting Indians, on account of the great 
use they make of darts, arrows and lances, and stones 
which fall on one like hail 



86 CORTÉS ORGANIZES HIS HOUSEHOLD. 

It was here in Havana that Cortes began to organize a 
household and to be treated as a Lord. The first Marshal 
of the household/ whom he appointed was a certain 
Guzman who soon afterwards died or was killed by the 
Indians (this was not Cristobal de Guzman, the Mayordomo 
of Cortes who took Guatemoc* prisoner during the war in 
Mexico) and he had as camarer<^ Rodrigo Ranguel, and 
for Mayordomo, Juan de Cáceres who became a rich man 
after the conquest of Mexico. 

When all this was settled we got ready to embark and 
the horses were divided among all the ships, and mangers 
were made for them and a store of maize and hay put on 
board. I will now call to mind all the mares and horses 
that were shipped : — 

The Captain Cortes : — A vicious dark chestnut horse, 
which died as soon as we arrived at San Juan de 
Ulúa. 
Pedro de Alvarado and Hernando Lopez de Avila : — a 
very good sorrel mare, good both for sport and as a 
charger. When we arrived at New Spain Pedro de 
Alvarado bought the other half share in the mare 
or took it by force. 
Alonzo Hernandez Puertocarrero : — a grey mare, a very 
good charger which Cortes bought for him with 
his gold buttons. 
Juan Velasquez de Leon : — A very powerful gray mare 
which we called " La Rabona,'** very handy and a 
good charger. 
Cristóval de Olid : — a dark chestnut horse, fairly good. 
Francisco de Montejo and Alonzo de Avila : — a parched 
sorrel horse, no use for warfare. 

^ Maestresala =» the chief waiter in a nobleman's household. 
' Guatemuz in the original. 
' Camarero = chamberlain. 
^ La Rabona = the bob-tailed. 



A LIST OF THE HORSES. 8/ 

Francisco de Morla : — a dark chestnut horse, very fast 

and very easily handled. 
Juan de Escalante : — a light chestnut horse with three 

white stockings, not much good. 
Diego de Ordás, a gfray mare, barren, tolerably good, 

but not fast. 
Gonzalo Dominguez : — a wonderfully good horseman ; 

a very good dark chestnut horse, a grand galloper. 
Pedro Gonzalez de Trujillo : — sl good chestnut horse, all 

chestnut, a very good goer. 
Moron, a settler at Bayamo: — a dappled horse with 

stockings on the forefeet, very handy. 
Baena : a settler at Trinidad : — a dappled horse almost 

black, no good for anything. 
Lares, a very good horseman : — an excellent horse of 

rather light chestnut colour, a very good goer. 
Ortiz the musician and Bartolomé Garcia, who once 

owned gold mines : — a very good dark horse called 

"El Arriero,"^ this was one of the best horses carried 

in the fleet. 
Juan Sedefto, a settler at Havana : — a chestnut mare 

which foaled on board ship. 

This Juan Sedefto passed for the richest soldier in the 
fleet, for he came in his own ship with the mare, and a 
negro and a store of cassava bread and salt pork, and at 
that time horses and negroes were worth their weight in 
gold, and that is the reason why more horses were not 
taken, for there were none to be bought. I will leave off" 
here and tell what next happened to us, when we were just 
about to embark. 

* Ei arriero =« the muleteer, carrier. 



88 DIEGO velAsquez again attempts 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

How Diego Velasquez sent a servant named Caspar de Gamica with 
orders and instructions that in any case Cortes should be arrested 
and the fleet taken from him, and what was done about it. 

To make my story clear, I must go back and relate that 
when Diego Velasquez knew for certain that his lieutenant 
and brother-in-law Francisco Verdugo who was stationed 
at the town of Trinidad not only refused to compel Cortes 
to leave the fleet, but, together with Diego de Ordás, had 
helped him to get away, they say that he was so angry 
that he roared with rage and told his secretary Andres de 
Duero and the Treasurer Amador de Lares that they had 
deceived him by the agreement they had made, and that 
Cortes was mutinous. He made up his mind to send a 
servant with letters and prders to Pedro Barba, his lieu- 
tenant at Havana, and wrote very graciously to all his 
friends who were settlers in that town, and to Diego de 
Ordás and to Juan Velasquez de Leon who were his friends 
and kinsmen praying them neither for good nor ill to let 
the fleet get away, and to seize Cortes at once and send 
him under a strong guard to Santiago de Cuba. 

On the arrival of Garnica (that was the name of the 
man who brought the letters and orders to Havana) it was 
known at once what he had brought with him, for by the 
same messenger Cortes was advised of what Velasquez was 
doing. It happened in this way ; — it appears that a friar 
of the Order of Mercy, who gave himself out to be a 
follower of Velasquez, was in the Governor's company at 
the time, and he wrote a letter to another friar of his order 
named Bartolomé del Olmedo, who was with us, and in 
that letter, written by the friar, Cortes was informed by his 
two associates, Andres de Duero and the treasurer of all 
that had happened. 



TO PREVENT THE FLEET FROM SAILING. 89 

To go back to my story : — As Cortes had sent away 
Diego de Ordás in a ship to collect stores, there was no 
one to oppose him except Juan Velasquez de Leon, and as 
soon as Cortes spoke to him he brought him over to his 
side, — all the more easily because Juan Velasquez was put 
out with his kinsman for not giving him a good grant of 
Indians. 

Not one of the others to whom Diego Velasquez had 
written favoured his proposal, indeed one and all declared 
for Cortes, the lieutenant Pedro Barba above all. In 
addition to this the Alvarados, Alonzo Hernandez Puerto- 
carrero, Francisco de Montejo, Cristóval de Olid, Juan de 
Escalante, Andres de Monjaraz, and his brother Gregorio 
de Monjaraz and all of us would have given our lives for 
Cortes. So that if in the Town of Trinidad the orders 
of Velasquez were slighted, in the town of Havana they 
were absolutely ignored. 

By this same Garnica, the lieutenant Pedro Barba wrote 
to Diego Velasquez that he did not dare to seize Cortes 
as he was too strongly supported by soldiers, and he was 
afraid lest Cortes should sack and plunder the town and 
carry off all the settlers along with 'him ; that from all that 
he had gathered Cortes was the Governor's faithful servant 
and would not dare to be anything else. Cortes also wrote 
to Velasquez in the agreeable and complimentary terms 
which he knew so well how to use, and told him that he 
should set sail next day and that he remained his humble 
servant 



90 THE FLEET ARRIVES 



CHAPTER XXV. 

How Cortes set sail with all his company of Gentlemen and soldiers 
for the Island of Cozumel and what happened there. 

There was to be no parade of the forces until we arrived 
at Cozumel. Cortes ordered the horses to be taken on 
board ship^and he directed Pedro de Alvarado to go along 
the North coast in a good ship named the San Sebastian^ 
and he told the pilot who was in charge to wait for him at 
Cape San Antonio as all the ship$ would meet there and 
go in company to Cozumel. He also sent a messenger to 
Diego de Ordás, who had gone along the North Coast 
to collect supplies of food with orders to do the same and 
await his coming. 

On the loth February 1519, after hearing Mass, they set 
sail along the south coast with nine ships and the company 
of gentlemen and soldiers whom I have mentioned, so that 
with the two ships absent on the north coast there were 
eleven ships in all, including that which carried Pedro de 
Alvarado with seventy soldiers and I travelled in his 
company. 

The Pilot named Camacho who was in charge of our 
ship paid no attention to the orders of Cortes and went 
his own way and we arrived at Cozumel two days before 
Cortes and anchored in the port which I have often 
mentioned when telling about Grijalva's expedition. 

Cortes had not yet arrived, being delayed by the ship 
commanded by Francisco de Morla having lost her rudder 
in bad weather, however she was supplied with another 
rudder by one of the ships of the fleet,^ and all then came 
on in company. 

^ Blotted out in the original MS. ''They turned back looking 
for the rudder in the sea and they found it and put it in its place, so 
thaf they were soon able to navigate the ship."— G. G. 



AT C02UMEL. 9 1 

To go back to Pedro de Alvarado. As soon as we 
arrived in port we went on shore with all the soldiers 
to the town of Cozumel, but we found no Indians there 
as they had all fled. So we were ordered to go on to 
another town about a league distant, and there also the 
natives had fled and taken to the bush, but they could not 
carry off their property and left behind their poultry and 
other things and Pedro de Alvarado ordered forty of the 
fowls to be taken. In an Idol house there were some 
altar ornaments made of old cloths and some little chests 
containing diadems, Idols, beads and pendants of gold of 
poor quality, and here we captured two Indians and an 
Indian woman, and we returned to the town where we 
had disembarked. 

While we were there Cortes arrived with all the fleet, 
and after taking up his lodging the first thing he did was 
to order the pilot Camacho to be put in irons for not 
having waited for him at sea as he had been ordered to 
do. When he saw the town without any people in it, and 
heard that Pedro de Alvarado had gone to the other 
town and had taken fowls and cloths and other things of 
small value from the Idols, and some gold which was half 
copper, he showed that he was very angry both at that 
and at the pilot not having waited for him, and he repri- 
manded Pedro de Alvarado severely, and told him that 
we should never pacify the country in that way by robbing 
the natives of their property, and he sent for the two 
Indians and the woman whom we had captured, and 
through Melchorejo, (Julianillo his companion was dead) 
the man we had brought from Cape Catoche who under- 
stood the language well, he spoke to them telling them to 
go and summon the Caciques and Indians of their town, 
and he told them not to be afraid, and he ordered the 
gold and the cloths and all the rest to be given back 
to them, and for the fowls (which had already been eaten) 



92 CORTáS REVIEWS 

he ordered them to be given beads and little bells, and in 
addition he gave to each Indian a Spanish shirt So they 
went off to summon the lord of the town, and the next 
day the Cacique and all his people arrived, women and 
children and all the inhabitants of the town, and they 
went about among us as though they had been used to us 
all their lives, and Cortes ordered us not to annoy them in 
any way. Here in this Island Cortes began to rule 
energetically, and Our Lord so favoured him that what- 
ever he put his hand to it turned out well for him, 
especially in pacifying the people and towns of these lands, 
as we shall see further on. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 



How Cortes reviewed all his army and what else happened 
to us. 

When we had been in Cozumel three days Cortes 
ordered a muster of his forces so as to see how many 
of us there were, and he found that we numbered five 
hundred and eight, not counting the shipmasters, pilots 
and sailors, who numbered about one hundred. There 
were sixteen horses and mares all fit to be used for sport 
or as chargers. 

There were eleven ships both great and small, and one 
a sort of launch which a certain Gines Nortes brought 
laden with supplies. 

There were thirty two cross bowmen and thirteen 
musketeers ; — escopeteros, as they were then called and 
^ brass guns, and four falconets, and much powder and 
ball. About the number of cross bowmen my memory 



1 Blotted out in the original MS. is the word '*ten."— G. G. 



HIS ARMY 93 

does not serve me very well, but it is not material to my 
story. 

After the review Cortes ordered Mesa surnamed "the 
gunner" and Bartolomé de Usagre and Arbenga and a 
certain Catalan who were all artillerymen, to keep their 
guns clean and in good order, and the ammunition ready 
for use. He appointed Francisco de Orozco, who had been 
a soldier in Italy to be captain of the Artillery. He like- 
wise ordered two crossbowmen named Juan Benitez and 
Pedro del Guzman the crossbowman, who were masters of 
the art of repairing crossbows, to see that every crossbow 
had two or three [spare] nuts and cords and fore cords and 
to be careful to keep them stored and to have smoothing 
tools and inguijuelc^ and [to see] that the men should 
practice at a target. He also ordered all the horses to be 
kept in good condition. 

I don't know why I should expend so much ink in 
telling about these preparations of arms and the rest 
of it, for in truth Cortes was most vigilant about every- 
thing. 



CHAPTER XXVH. 



How Cortes came to know that the Indians of Cape Catoche held two 
Spaniards in captivity, and what he did about it. 

As Cortes was most diligent in all matters, he sent for 
me and a Biscayan named Martin Ramos, and asked us 
what we thought about those words which the Indians of 
Campeche had used when we went there with Francisco 
Hernandez de Cordova, when they cried out "Castilan, 
Castilan'* as I have already stated in the chapter which 
treats of that expedition. We again related to Cortes all 
that we had seen and heard about the matter, and he said 

* Probably some technical term now obsolete. 



94 NEWS OF SPANIARDS HELD AS PRISONERS. 

that he also had often thought about it, and that perhaps 
there might be some Spaniards living in the country, and 
added " It seems to me that it would be well to ask these 
Caciques of Cozumel if they know anything about them." 
So through Melchorejo, the man from Cape Catoche, who 
already understood a little Spanish and knew the language 
of Cozumel very well, all the chiefs were questioned, and 
every one of them said that they had known of certain 
Spaniards and gave descriptions of them, and said that 
some Caciques, who lived about two days' journey inland, 
/ "" kept them as slaves, and that here in Cozumel were some 
[^ Indian traders who spoke to them only a few days ago. 
We were all delighted at this news, and Cortes told the 
Caciques that they must go at once and summon the 
Spaniards, taking with them letters, (which in the Indian 
language they call atnales) and he gave shirts to the 
Caciques and Indians who went with the letters and spoke 
reassuringly to them, and told them that when they returned 
he would give them some more beads. The Cacique 
advised Cortes to send a ransom to the owners who held 
these men as slaves, so that they should be allowed to 
come, and Cortes did so, and gave to the messengers all 
manner of beads. Then he ordered the two smallest 
vessels to be got ready (one of them was little larger than 
a launch) and twenty men with guns and crossbows, under 
• " the command of Diego de Ordás, and he sent them off to 
the coast near Cape Catoche where the larger vessel was to 
wait for eight days while the smaller vessel should go back- 
wards and forwards and bring news of what was being 
done, for the land of Cape Catoche was only four leagues 
distant, and the one country could be seen from the other. 
In the letter Cortes said : — " Gentlemen and brothers, 
here in Cozumel I have learnt that you are captives in the 
hands of a Cacique, and I pray you that you come here to 
Cozumel at once, and for this purpose I have sent a ship 



JERONIMO DE AGUILAR AND GONZALO GUERRERO. 95 

with soldiers, in case you have need of them, and a ransom 
to be paid to those Indians with whom you are living. 
The ship will wait eight days for you. Come in all haste, 
and you will be welcomed and protected. I am here at 
this Island with five hundred soldiers and eleven ships, in 
which I go on, please God, to a town called Tabasco or 
Potonchan." 

The two vessels were soon despatched with the two 
Indian traders from Cozumel who carried the letters, and 
they crossed the strait in three hours and the messengers 
with the letters and ransom were landed. In two days 
the letters were delivered to a Spaniard named Jerónimo 
de Aguilar, for that we found to be his name, and so 
I shall call him in future. When he had read the letter 
and received the ransom of beads which we had sent to 
him he was delighted, and carried the ransom to the 
Cacique his master, and begged leave to depart, and the 
Cacique at once gave him leave to go wherever he pleased. 
Aguilar set out for the place, five leagues distant, where 
his companion Gonzalo Guerrero was living, but when he 
read the letter to him he answered, " Brother Aguilar, I 
am married and have three children and the Indians look 
on me as a Cacique and captain in wartime, — You go and 
God be with you, but I have my face tatooed and my ears 
pierced, what would the Spaniards say should they see me 
in this guise ? and look how handsome these boys of mine 
are, for God's sake give me those green beads you have 
brought and I will give the beads to them and say that 
my brothers have sent them from my own country." And 
the Indian wife of Gonzalo spoke to Aguilar in her own 
tongue very angrily and said to him, " What is this slave 
coming here for talking to my husband, — go off with you, 
and don't trouble us with any more words." 

Then Aguilar reminded Gonzalo that he was a Christian 
and said that he should not imperil his soul for the sake of 



96 ORDÍS RETURNS WITHOUT NEWS. 



I 



I 



an Indian woman, and as for his wife and children he could 
take them with him if he did not wish to desert them 
But by no words or admonishments could he be persuaded 
to come. It appears that Gonzalo Guerrero was a sailor 
and a native of Palos. 

When Jerónimo de Aguilar saw that Gonzalo would not 
accompany him he went at once, with the two Indian 
messengers, to the place where the ship had been awaiting ^ 
his coming, but when he arrived he saw no ship for she had t. 
already departed. The eight days during which Ordás ^ 
had been ordered to await and one day more had already ' 
expired, and seeing that Aguilar had not arrived Ordás S 
returned to Cozumel without bringing any news about that 
for which he had come. 

When Aguilar saw that there was no ship there he 
became very sad, and returned to his master and to the 
town where he usually lived. 

Now I will leave this and say that when Cortes saw 
Ordás return without success or any news of the Spaniards 
or Indian messengers he was very angry, and said haughtily 
to Ordás that he thought that he would have done better 
than to return without the Spaniards or any news of them, 
for it was quite clear that they were prisoners in that r" 
country. 

At that moment it happened that some sailors called 
the reflates,^ natives of Gibraleon,^ had stolen some pieces 
of salt pork from a soldier named Berrio and would not 
return them, so Berrio complained to Cortes and the 
sailors were put on oath, and they perjured themselves, 
but in the enquiry the fact of the theft was proved, and 
that the pork had been divided among seven sailors, and 
Cortes ordered four of them to be flogged, in spite of the 
appeals of some of the Captains. 

^ Penates — rock men. ' Gibraltar. 



- L. A BLACK SERMON*-- 97 

Here I must leave both this matter of the sailors and 
that of Aguilac,. and keep the story of "^ur journey up 
to date and telí how many Indians both the natives of the 
towns near 'Gape Catoche and those from other parts of 
Yucatan camcon pilgrimages to thfc Island of Cozumel, for 
it appeared that there %veire some very, hideous idols kept 
in a certim oratory on Cozumel toivliich it was the custom 
. w|j of the people of the land to offer sacrifices at that season. 
One morning the courtyard of the oratory where the Idols 
were tept was crowded with Indians, and n:iany of them 
both men and wunien were burning a resin like our incense. 
J / As this was a n^ us we stood round watching it 

I ' with attention, diui ^prt^^cntly an old Indian with a long 
cloak, who was the priest of A!tó^|^||^i§|jjj^Ihave already 
Í r said that the priests in New Spain arc called/^hii^ent 
up on the top of the oratory and began to preach to tHe 
I people. Cortes and all of us were wondering what would 

be the result of that black sermon. Cortes asked Mel- 
Í chorejo, who understood the language well, what the old 

F Indian was saying, for he was informed that he was preach- 

ing evil things, and he sent for the Cacique and all the 
p principal chiefs and the priest himself, and, as well as he 

f could through the aid of our interpreter, he told them 

that if we were to be brothers they must cast those most 
evil Idols out of their temple, for they were not gods at all 
f but very evil things which led them astray and could lead 

I their souls to hell. Then he spoke to them about good 

and holy things, and told them to set up in the place of 
^ ,v their Idols an image of Our Lady which he gave them, and 
t - a cross, which would always aid them and bring good 
f harvests and would save their souls, and he told them in a 

very excellent way other things about our holy faith. 

The Priest and the Caciques answered that their fore- 
fathers had worshipped those Idols because they were 
good, and that they did not dare to do otherwise, and that 

H 



U, 



f 



98 COMMANDERS APPOINTED. 

if we cast out their Idols we would see how much harm it 
would do us, for we should be lost at sea. Then Cortes 
ordered us to break the Idols to pieces and roll them down 
the steps,^ and this we did ; then he ordered lime to be 
brought, of which there was a good store in the town, and 
Indian masons, and he set up a very fair altar on which 
we placed the figure of Our Lady ; and he ordered two 
of our party named Alonzo Yánez and Alvaro Lopez who 
were carpenters and joiners to make a cross of some rough 
timber which was there, and it was placed in a small chapel 
near the altar and the priest named Juan Diaz said mass 
there, and the Cacique and the heathen priest and all the 
Indians stood watching us with attention. 

The Caciques in this Island of Cozumel are called 
Calachiones as I have already said when telling about our 
doings at Potonchan. Now I will leave off here, and will 
go on to tell how we embarked on board ship. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 



How Cortes allotted the ships and appointed captains to go in them, 
and gave instructions to the pilots and arranged lantern signals 
for the night time, and what else happened to us. 

Cortes himself took command of the flagship, Pedro de 
Alvarado and his brothers took charge of the San Sebastian^ 
a very good ship, and the commands of the other ships 
were given to Alonso Hernandez Puertocarrero, Francisco 
de Montejo, who had a good ship, Cristóval de Olid, Diego 
de Ordás, Juan Velasquez de Leon, Juan de Escalante, 

1 In the " Itinerary of Grijalva" a temple or oratory of the Idols is 
thus described : — " It was eighteen steps (of a stairway) in height and 
the base was solid, and the measurement round it was ona hundred 
and eighty feet. On the top of this was a small tower the height of 
two men one above the other and inside were certain figures and 
bones and Cents which are the Idols which they worship." 



THE FLEET RETURNS TO COZUMEL. 99 

Francisco de Moria, the Page Escobar, and the smallest 
vessel of all, a launch, was commanded by Gines Nortes. 
Each ship had its pilot; Anton de.Alaminos was Pilot 
in Chief, and instructions were given about the course to 
be steered and other matters, and about the lantern signals 
for the night time. 

Cortes took leave of the Caciques and priests and con- 
fided to their care the Image of Our Lady and told them 
to reverence the cross and keep it clean and wreathed with 
flowers and they would see what advantage they would 
gain by so doing, and the Indians replied that they would 
do so, and they brought four fowls and two jars of honey 
and they embraced him. 

We embarked and set sail on a day in the Month of 
March 15 19, and went on our way in fair weather. At ten 
o'clock that same morning loud shouts were given from 
one of the ships, which tried to lay to, and fired a shot so 
that all the vessels of the fleet might hear it, and when 
Cortes heard this he at once checked the flagship and 
seeing the ship commanded by Juan de Escalante bearing 
away and returning towards Cozumel, he cried out to the 
other ships which were near him "What is the matter? 
What is the matter?** And a soldier named Luis de 
Zaragoza answered that Juan de Escalante's ship with 
all the Cassava bread on board was sinking, and Cortes 
cried, " Pray God that we suffer no such disaster," and 
he ordered the Pilot Alaminos to make signal to all the 
other ships to return to Cozumel. So this same day we 
returned to the port whence we had sailed, and sent the 
Cassava bread on shore, and we found the image of Our 
Lady and the Cross well cared for with incense burning in 
front of it, and this pleased us greatly. The Cacique and 
priests came to speak to Cortes and asked why we had 
returned, and he replied, because one of the ships was 
leaking and we wished to caulk her, and he asked them to 

H 2 



100 THE ARRIVAL OF 

come in their canoes and help the ships boats to bring the 
Cassava bread on shore, and this they did. 

We were four days repairing the ship. Now I will stop 
writing about this, and will relate how the Spaniard named 
Aguilar who was a prisoner among the Indians heard 
of our return, and what else happened. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 



How the Spaniard named Jerónimo de Aguilar, who was a prisoner 
among the Indians, heard that we had returned to Cozumel and 
came to us, and what else took place. 

When the Spaniard who was a prisoner among the 
Indians, knew for certain that we had returned to Cozumel 
with the ships, he was very joyful and gave thanks to God, 
and he came in all haste with the two Indians who had 
carried the letters and ransom, and embarked in a canoe, 
and as he was able to pay well with the green beads 
we had sent him, he soon hired a canoe and six Indian 
rowers, and they rowed so fast that, meeting no head wind, 
in a very short time they crossed the strait between the 
two shores, which is a distance of about four leagues. 

When they arrived on the coast of Cozumel and were 
disembarking, some soldiers who had gone out hunting 
(for there were wild pigs on the island) told Cortes that a 
large canoe, which had come from the direction of Cape 
Catoche, had arrived near the town. Cortes sent Andres 
de Tápia and two other soldiers to go and see, for it was a 
new thing for Indians to come fearlessly in large canoes 
into our neighbourhood. So they set out, and as soon as 
the Indians who came in the canoe which Aguilar had 
hired caught sight of the Spaniards, they were frightened 
and wished to get back into the canoe and flee away. 
Aguilar told th^m in th^ir own language not to be afraid, 



JERONIMO DE AGUILAk. töi 

that these men were his brothers. When Andres de Tápia 
saw that they were only Indians (for Aguilar looked 
neither more nor less than an Indian), he at once sent 
word to Cortes by a Spaniard that they were Cozumel 
Indians who had come in the canoe. As soon as the men 
had landed, the Spaniard in words badly articulated and 
worse pronounced, cried Dios y Santa Maria de Sevilla^ 
and Tápia went at once to embrace him. The other 
soldier who had accompanied Tápia when he saw what 
had happened, promptly ran to Cortes to beg a reward for 
the good news, for it was a Spaniard who had come in the 
canoe, and we were all delighted when we heard it 

Tápia soon brought the Spaniard to Cortes, but before 
he arrived where Cortes was standing, several Spaniards 
asked Tápia where the Spaniard was? although he was 
walking by his side, for they could not distinguish him 
from an Indian as he was naturally brown and he had his 
hair shorn like an Indian slave, and carried a paddle on 
his shoulder, he was shod with one old sandal and the 
other was tied to his belt, he had on a ragged old cloak, 
and a worse loin cloth with which he covered his naked- 
ness, and he had tied up, in a bundle in his cloak, a Book of 
Hours, old and worn. When Cortes saw him in this state, 
he too was deceived like the other soldiers, and asked 
Tápia " Where is the Spaniard ?" On hearing this, the 
Spaniard squatted down on his haunches as the Indians 
do and said " I am he." Cortes at once ordered him to be 
given a shirt and doublet and drawers and a cape and 
sandals, for he had no other clothes, and asked him about, 
himself and what his name was and when he came to this 
country. The man replied, pronouncing with difficulty, 
that he was called Jerónimo de Aguilar, a native of Ecija, 
and that he had taken holy orders, that eight years had 
passed since he and fifteen other men and two women left 
Darien for the Island of Santo Domingo, where he had 



I02 THE ARRIVAL OF 

some disputes and a law-suit with a certain Enciso y 
Valdivia, and he said that they were carrying ten thousand 
gold dollars and the legal documents of the case, and that 
the ship in which they sailed, struck on the Alacranes so 
that she could not be floated, and that he and his com- 
panions and the two women got into the ship's boat, 
thinking to reach the Island of Cuba or Jamaica, but that 
the currents were very strong and carried them to this 
land, and that the Calachiones of that district had divided 
them among themselves, and that many of his companions 
had been sacrificed to the Idols, and that others had died 
of disease, and the women had died of overwork only a 
short time before, for they had been made to grind corn ; 
that the Indians had intended him for a sacrifice, but that 
one night he escaped and fled to the Cacique with whom 
since then he had been living (I don't remember the name 
that he gave) and that none were left of all his party except 
himself and a certain Gonzalo Guerrero, whom he had gone 
to summon, but he would not come. 

When Cortes heard all this, he gave thanks to God, 
and said that he would have him well looked after and 
rewarded. He questioned Aguilar about the country and 
the towns, but Aguilar replied that having been a slave, 
he knew only about hewing wood and drawing water and 
digging in the fields, that he had only once travelled as far 
as four leagues from home when he was sent with a load, 
but, as it was heavier than he could carry, he fell ill, but 
that he understood that there were very many towns. 
When questioned about Gonzalo Guerrero, he said that he 
was married and had three sons, and that his face was 
tattooed and his ears and lower lip were pierced, that he 
was a seaman and a native of Palos, and that the Indians 
considered him to be very valiant ; that when a little more 
than a year s^o a captain and three vessels arrived at 
Cape Catoche, (it seems probable that this was when we 



JERONIMO DE AGUILAR. IO3 

came with Francisco Hernandez de Cordova) it was at the 
suggestion of Guerrero that the Indians attacked them, 
and that he was there himself in the company of the 
Cacique of the large town, whom I have spoken about 
when describing the expedition of Francisco Hernandez 
de Cordova. When Cortes heard this he exclaimed " I 
wish I had him in my hands for it will never do to leave 
him here." 

When the Caciques of Cozumel found out that Aguilar 
could speak their language, they gave him to eat of their 
best, and Aguilar advised them always to respect and 
revere the holy image of Our Lady and the Cross, for they 
would find that it would benefit them greatly. 

On the advice of Aguilar the Caciques asked Cortes to 
give them a letter of recommendation, so that if any other 
Spaniards came to that port they would treat the Indians 
well and do them no harm, and this letter was given to 
them. After bidding the people good-bye with many 
caresses and promises we set sail for the Rio de Gri- 
jalva. 

This is the true story of Aguilar, and not the other 
which the historian Gómara has written ; however, I am 
not surprised that what he says is news to me. Now I 
must go on with my story. 



CHAPTER XXX. 



How we again embarked and made sail for the Rio de Grijalva, 
and what happened to us on the voyage. 

On the 4th March 1519, with the good fortune to carry 
such a useful and faithful interpreter along with us, Cortes 
gave orders for us to embark in the same order as we 



104 A VESSEL MISSING. 

had followed before we ran back to Cozumel, under the 
same instructions and with the same lantern signals by 
night 

We sailed along in good weather, until at nightfall a 
head wind struck us so fiercely that the ships were dis- 
persed and there was great danger of being driven ashore. 
Thank God, by midnight the weather moderated, and as 
soon as dawn broke the ships got together again, 
excepting the vessel under the command of Juan 
Velasquez de Leon. We went on our way and up to 
midday had seen nothing of the missing vessel which 
distressed us all as we feared she had been lost on a 
shoal. When the whole day had passed and she did 
not appear Cortes told the pilot Alaminos that it was 
no good going on any further without news of the missing 
ship, so the pilot made signal for all the vessels to lay to, 
and wait to see if by chance the storm had driven her into 
some bay whence she could not get out again against a 
head wind. However, when she still failed to appear, the 
pilot said to Cortes, " Sir, I feel certain that she put into a 
sort of port or bay which we have already passed, and 
that a head wind keeps her there, for the pilot on board 
of her is Juan Alvarez el Manquillo who was with Fran- 
cisco Hernandez de Cordova and again with Grijalva and 
he knows that port." So it was agreed that the whole 
fleet should go back and search for the missing ship, and 
we found her at anchor in the bay of which the pilot had 
spoken, which was a great relief to us all. We stayed in 
that bay for a day and we lowered two boats and the 
pilot and a Captain called Francisco de Lugo went on 
shore and found farms and maize plantations, and some 
places where the Indians made salt, and there were four 
Cues which are the houses of their Idols, and there were 
many Idols in them, nearly all of them figures of tall 




UNIVEP^'T^' * 



PtíNTA DÉ LAS MUGÉRÉS. lÓj 

women so that we called that place the Punta de las 
Mugeres} 

I remember that Aguilar said that the town where he 
was held in slavery was near these farms and that he had 
come there with a load, and his master had taken him 
there, and that he fell ill on account of the weight of the 
load, and he said that the town where Gonzalo Guerrero 
lived was not far off, and that there was some gold in all 
the towns, but it did not amount to much; that if we liked 
he would guide us to the towns, and advised us to go 
there. Cortes replied, laughing, that we were not after 
such small game, but to serve God and the King. 

Soon afterwards Cortes ordered a Captain named 
Escobar to go in the vessel under his command, which 
was a fast sailer and drew little water, to the Boca de 
Términos and to examine the place thoroughly and find 
out if it would be a good port for a settlement, and if 
game were plentiful there as he had been told it was. 
That after he had examined the place he should put up 
some sign and break down some trees at the mouth of the 
harbour, or that he should write a letter and place it where 
we could see it from either side of the harbour, so that we 
should know that he had gone in there; or that, after 
examining the port he should beat up to windward and 
await the fleet at sea. This order was given on the 



* Punta de las Mugeres =» the cape of the women. The Island 
which forms the bay is still called Isla de las Mugeres. Bemal Diaz 
says nothing about this locality in his description of the two earlier 
voyages, but the author of the Itinerario says that Grijalva observed 
it, after leaving Cozumel : — " We made sail and went towards the 
Island of Yucatan along the North Coast, and as we coasted along we 
came to a beautiful tower on a point, which is said to be inhabited 
by women who live without men. One might believe them to be a 
race of Amazons.'' As Grijalva could not possibly have had any 
information on the subject, it seems to show that the Itinerario 
was written at a later date than is usually assigned to it, and gave 
this explanation to account for the name given to the locality by 
Cortes. 



I06 ESCOBAR EXAMINES THE PUERTO DE TÉRMINOS. 

advice of the pilot, so that when we arrived at the Boca 
de Términos with the fleet we should not be delayed by 
going into port. 

So Escobar left us and went to the Puerte de Términos 
and did all that he was told to do, and he found the 
lurcher which had been left there in Grijalva's time, and 
she was fat and sleek. Escobar said that when the 
lurcher saw the ship come into port she wagged her 
tail and showed other signs of delight, and came at 
once to the soldiers and went with them on board the 
ship. 

After carrying out his orders Escobar put to sea again 
and awaited the fleet, and it appears that with the south 
wind that was blowing he was not able to lay to but was 
driven out to sea. 

To go back to our fleet ; we remained at the Punta de 
las Mugeres until the next day when we put to sea with a 
good breeze ofi* the land and went on until we arrived at 
the Boca de Términos, but, as we did not meet Escobar, 
Cortes ordered a boat to be lowered, and with ten cross- 
bowmen went to look for him in the Boca de Términos, or 
to see if there was any signal or letter. They soon found 
trees that had been cut down, and a letter in which 
Escobar said that the harbour was a good one, that the 
land was fertile, and that there was an abundance of 
game, and he told about the lurcher. However, the 
pilot Alaminos told Cortes that we had better keep on 
our course, for with the wind from the south Escobar • 
must have been driven out to sea, but that he would not 
be far off" as he would lie close to the wind. But Cortes 
was anxious lest some accident had befallen him, so he 
ordered the sheets to be slacked away and we soon came 
up to Escobar who made his report to Cortes and told 
him why he could not await his coming. 

While this was taking place we arrived near Potonchan 



THE FLEET SAILS PAST CHANPOTON. I07 

[Chanpoton] and Cortes ordered the Pilot to drop anchor 
in the bay, but the Pilot replied that it was a bad port, for 
the tide ran out so far that the ships had to be brought 
up more than two leagues from the shore. Cortes had a 
mind to give the Indians a lesson on account of the 
defeat they had inflicted on Francisco Hernandez de 
Cordova and Grijalva, and many of us soldiers who had 
been in those battles begged him to go in, and not to 
leave without giving the Indians a good chastisement, 
even if it did detain us two or three days. But the Pilot 
Alaminos and the other pilots contended that if we should 
go in it might, with a head wind, be eight days before we 
could get out again ; that we had a fair wind now for 
Tabasco and could get there in two days. So we passed 
on and after three days sail arrived at the Rio de Grijalva 
called in the Indian langfuage the Tabasco River, and 
what happened to us there and the attack that was made 
on us I will go on to relate. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 



How we arrived at the Rio de Grijalva, which in the language of 
the Indians is called Tabasco, of the attack the Indians made 
on us, and what else happened to us with them. 

On the 12th March, 15 19, we arrived with all the fleet 
at the Rio de Grijalva, which is also called Tabasco, and 
as we already knew from our experience with Grijalva 
that vessels of large size could not enter into the river, 
the larger vessels were anchored out at sea, and from the 
smaller vessels and boats all the soldiers were landed at 
the Cape of the Palms (as they were in Grijalva's time) 
which was about half a league distant from the town of 



lo8 THE RIO DE GRIJALVA OR DE TABASCO. 

Tabasco.* The river, the river banks and the mangrove 
thickets were swarming with Indians, at which those of 
us who had not been here in Grijalva's time were much 
astonished. 

In addition to this there were assembled in the town 
more than twelve thousand warriors* all prepared to make 
war on us, for at this time the town was of considerable 
importance and other large towns were subject to it 
and they had all made preparation for war and were 
well supplied with the arms which they are accustomed 
to use. 

The reason for this was that the people of Potonchan' 
and Lázaro and the other towns in that neighbourhood 
had looked upon the people of Tabasco as cowards, and 
had told them so to their faces, because they had given 



^ The large town which the author here calls Tabasco appears 
originally to have been called Potonchan ; it was renamed by the 
Spaniards Santa Maria de la Victoria ; it was later on called Tabasco, 
and it soon fell into ruin and disappeared altogether, its place as 
a port being taken by Frontera on the other side of the river. 
In the Relacion de la Villa de Santa Maria de la Victoria^ 1579 
{Relaciones de Yucatan^ vol. ii, p. 341), we find : "This river and port is 
at 18" 30' (N. Lat.), where this town was established about a league 
from the mouth of the river on 2iplacel* of water which is formed on 
the north side, and on a branch of the river which leads to a town 
called Taxagual, of fifteen households i^vecinos) more or less, which is 
three leagues from this town and one league away from the river. The 
land of this town [Santa Maria] is sterile because it is built on sand 
and swamps. This branch of the river turns to the south-west, andcj, 
into it enter swamps and lagoons, and it has many diqp places ' 
{bajos). The barques and frigates anchor in this branch of the river 
when they come to this town to load or unload at the foot of the Cross 
which is at the end of the street and the mound on which it stands." 
See also Note to Chapter III. In the American Antiquarian for 
September, 1896, Dr. Daniel Brinton published an article on "The 
Battle and the Ruins of Cintla," taken principally from notes made 
by the late Dr. C. H. Berendt, who visited and surveyed the ruins in 
March and April, 1869. 

* Blotted out in the original : " twenty eight thousand." 

' Chanpoton. 



* " Sobre un placel de Agua que se hace de la parte del Norte" = on 
a sandbank which has formed to the north of the water (?). 



THE RIO DE GRIJALVA OR DE TABASCO. IO9 

Grijalva the gold jewels which I have spoken about in 
an earlier chapter, and they said that they were too 
faint hearted to attack us although they had more towns 
and more warriors than the people of Potonchan and 
Lázaro. This they said to annoy them and added that 
they in their towns had attacked us and killed fifty six of 
us. So on account of these taunts which had been 
uttered, the people of Tabasco had determined to take 
up arms. 

When Cortes saw them drawn up ready for war he 
told Aguilar the interpreter, who spoke the language of 
Tabasco well,^ to ask the Indians who passed near us, 
in a large canoe and who looked like chiefs, what they 
were so much disturbed about, and to tell them that 
we had not come to do them any harm, but were willing 
to give them some of the things we had brought with 
us and to treat them like brothers, and we prayed them 
not to begin a war as they would regret it, and much 
else was said to them about keeping the peace. How- 
ever, the more Aguilar talked to them the more violent 
they became, and they said that they would kill us all 
if we entered their town, and that it was fortified all 
round with fences and barricades of large trunks of trees. 

Aguilar spoke to them again and asked them to keep 
the peace, and allow us to take water and barter our 
goods with them for food, and permit us to tell the 
Calachones* things which would be to their advantage 
and to the service of God our Lord, but they still per- 
sisted in saying that if we advanced beyond the palm 
trees they would kill us. 

When Cortes saw the state of affairs he ordered the 



* These people were Tzendals, a branch of the Maya stock, and 
Aguilar, who spoke Maya, could understand and speak to them. 

' Calachiones? 



no THE SPANIARDS LAND 

boats and small vessels to be got ready and ordered three 
cannon to be placed in each boat and divided the cross- 
bowmen and musketeers among the boats. We remem- 
bered that when we were here with Grijalva we had found 
a narrow path which ran across some streams from the 
palm grove to the town, and Cortes ordered three soldiers 
to find out in the night if that path ran right up to the 
houses, and not to delay in bringing the news, and these 
men found out that it did lead there. After making a 
thorough examination of our surroundings the rest of the 
day was spent in arranging how and in what order we 
were to go in the boats. 

The next morning we had our arms in readiness and 
after hearing mass Cortes ordered the Captain Alonzo de 
Avila and a hundred soldiers among whom were ten 
crossbowmen, to go by the little path which led to the 
town, and, as soon as he heard the guns fired, to attack 
the town on one side while he attacked it on the other. 
Cortes himself and all the other Captains and soldiers 
went in the boats and light draft vessels up the river. 
When the Indian warriors who were on the banks and 
among the mangroves saw that we were really on the 
move, they came after us with a great many canoes with 
intent to prevent our going ashore at the landing place, 
and the whole river bank appeared to be covered with 
Indian warriors carrying all the diíTerent arms which 
they use, and blowing trumpets and shells and sounding 
drums. When Cortes saw how matters stood he ordered 
us to wait a little and not to fire any shots from guns 
or crossbows or cannon, for as he wished to be justified 
in all that he might do he made another appeal to the 
Indians through the interpreter Aguilar, in the presence 
of the King's Notary, Diego de Godoy, asking the Indians 
to allow us to land and take water and speak to them 
about God and about His Majesty, and adding that should 



AND ATTACK TABASCO. Ill 

they make war on us, that if in defending ourselves some 
should be killed and others hurt, theirs would be the fault 
and the burden and it would not lie with us, but they 
went on threatening that if we landed they would kill us. 

Then they boldly began to let fly arrows at us, and 
made signals with their drums, and like valiant men they 
surrounded us with their canoes, and they all attacked us 
with such a shower of arrows that they kept us in the 
water in some parts up to our waists. As there was much 
mud and swamp at that place we could not easily get 
clear of it, and so many Indians fell on us, that what 
with some hurling their lances with all their might and 
others shooting arrows at us, we could not reach the land 
as .soon as we wished. 

While Cortes was fighting he lost a shoe in the mud and 
could not find it again, and he got on shore with one foot 
bare. Presently someone picked the shoe out of the mud 1/ 
and he put it on again. 

While this was happening to Cortes, all of us Captains 
as well as soldiers, with the cry of " Santiago," fell upon 
the Indians and forced them to retreat, but they did not fall 
back far, as they sheltered themselves behind great barriers 
and stockades formed of thick logs until we pulled them 
apart and got to one of the small gateways of the town. 
There we attacked them again, and we pushed them along 
through a street to where other defences had been erected, 
and there they turned on us and met us face to face and 
fought most valiantly, making the greatest efforts, shouting 
and whistling and crying out " al calacheoni ", " al cala- 
cheoni ", which in their language meant an order to kill or 
capture our Captain. While we were thus surrounded by 
them Alonzo de Avila and his soldiers came up. 

As I have already said they came from the Palm grove 
by land and could not arrive sooner on account of the 
swamps and creeks. Their delay was really unavoidable. 



112 THE INDIANS DEFEATED. 

just as we also had been delayed over the summons of the 
Indians to surrender, and in breaking openings in the 
barricades, so as to enable us to attack them. Now we all 
joined together to drive the enemy out of their strong- 
holds, and we compelled them to retreat, but like brave 
warriors they kept on shooting showers of arrows and 
fire-hardened darts, and never turned their backs on us 
until [we gained] a great court with chambers and large 
halls, and three Idol houses, where they had already 
carried all the goods they possessed. Cortes then ordered 
us to halt, and not to follow on and overtake the enemy in 
their flight 

There and then Cortes took possession of that land for 
His Majesty, performing the act in His Majesty's name. 
It was done in this way ; he drew his sword and as a sign 
of possession h^ made three cuts in a huge tree called a 
Ceiba^ which stood in the court of that great square, and 
cried that if any person should raise objection, that he 
would defend the right with the sword and shield which 
he held in his hands. 

All of us soldiers who were present when this happened 
cried out that he did right in taking possession of the land 
in His Majesty's name, and that we would aid him should 
any person say otherwise. This act was done in the 
presence of the Royal Notary. The partizans of Diego 
Velasquez 'chose to grumble at this act of taking pos- 



session 



1 



I call to mind that in that hard fought attack which the 
Indians made on us, they wounded fourteen soldiers, and 



^ This was the first overt act showing the intenlion of Cortes to free 
himself from the control of Velasquez and place himself directly under 
the protection of his sovereign, a policy which was consummated a 
few weeks later on the sands at Vera Cruz. Had Cortes intended to 
continue his subservience to Diego Velásques, his name would have 
been used in the formal act of taking possession as ii had been used 
in the proclamations made by Cortes in Cuba. 



FLIGHT OF MELCHOREJO. 1 13 

they gave me an arrow wound in the thigh, but it was only 
a slight wound; and we found eighteen Indians dead in 
the water where we disembarked. 

We slept there [in thp great square] that night with 
guards and sentinels on the alert. I will stop here and go 
on to tell what more happened. 

Note.— The Carta de Vera Cruz says that the Indians then sent 
a deputation and a small present to Cortes, but still insisted that the 
Spaniards should leave the country. Cortes demanded food for his 
men, and the Indians promised to send it. Cortes then waited for two 
days, and as no Indians with food made their appearance he sent out 
the foraging expeditions described in the following Chapter. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 



How Cortes ordered two of his Captains each with a hundred soldiers 
to go and examine the country further inland, and what happened 
to us. 

The next morning Cortes ordered Pedro de Alvarado 
to set out in command of a hundred soldiers, iifteen of 
them with guns and crossbows, to examine the country 
inland for a distance of two leagues, and to take Mel- 
chorejo the interpreter from Cape Catoche in his company. 
When Melchorejo was looked for he could not be found as 
he had run off with the people of Tabasco, and it appears 
that the day before he had left the Spanish clothes that 
had been given to him hung up in the palm grove, and had 
fled by night in a canoe. Cortes was much annoyed at 
his flight, fearing that he would tell things to his fellow 
countrymen to our disadvantage, — well, let him go as a bit 
of bad luck, and let us get back to our story. Cortes also 
sent the Captain Francisco de Lugo, in another direction, 
with a hundfed soldiers, twelve of them musketeers and 
crossbowmen, with instructions not to go beyond two 
leagues and to return to the camp to sleep. 

I 



114 THE INDIANS ATTACK. 

When Francisco de Lugo and his company had marched 
about a league from camp he came on a great host of 
Indian archers carrying lances and shields, drums and 
standards and they made straight for our company of 
soldiers and surrounded them on all sides. They were so 
numerous and shot their arrows so deftly that it was 
impossible to withstand them, and they hurled their fire- 
hardened darts and cast stones from their slings in such 
numbers that they fell like hail, and they attacked our 
men with their two-handed knife-like swords.* Stoutly as 
Francisco de Lugo and his soldiers fought, they could not 
ward off the enemy, and when this was clear to them, 
while still keeping a good formation, they began to retreat 
towards the camp. A certain Indian, a swift and daring 
runner, had been sent off to the camp to beg Cortes to 
come to their assistance, meanwhile Francisco de Lugo by 
careful management of his musketeers and crossbowmen, 
some loading while others fired, and by occasional charges 
was able to hold his own against all the squadrons at- 
tacking him. , 

Let us leave him in the dangerous situation I have 
described and return to Captain Pedro de Alvarado, who 
after marching about a league came on a creek which was 
very difficult to cross, and it pleased God our Lord so to 
lead him that he should return by another road in the 
direction where Francisco de Lugo was fighting. When 
he heard the reports of the muskets and the great din of 
drums and trumpets, and the shouts and whistles of the 
Indians, he knew that there must be a battle going on, so 
with the greatest haste but in good order he ran towards 
the cries and shots and found Captain Francisco de Lugo 
and his men fighting with their faces to the enemy, and 
five of the enemy lying dead. As soon as he joined forces 

* Macanas or Maquahuitls — edged with flint or obsidian. 



THE SCOUTING PARTIES. II 5 

with Francisco de Lugo they turned on the Indians and 
drove them back, but they were not able to put them 
to flight, and the Indians followed our men right up to 
the camp. 

In like manner other companies of warriors had attacked 
us where Cortes was guarding the wounded, but we soon 
drove them off with our guns, which laid many of them 
low, and with our good sword play. 

When Cortes heard of Francisco de Lugo's peril from 
the Cuban Indian who came to beg for help, we promptly 
went to his assistance, and we met the two captains with 
their companies about half a league from the camp. Two 
soldiers of Francisco de Lugo's company were killed and 
eight wounded, and three of Pedro de Alvarado's company 
were wounded. When we arrived in camp we buried the 
dead and tended the wounded, and stationed sentinels and 
kept a strict watch. 

In those skirmishes we killed fifteen Indians and cap- 
tured three, one of whom seemed to be a chief, and through 
Aguilar, our interpreter, we asked them why they were so 
mad as to attack us, and that they could see that we 
should kill them if they attacked us again. Then one of 
these Indians was sent with some beads to give to the 
Caciques to bring them to peace, and that messenger told 
us that the Indian Melchorejo whom we had brought from 
Cape Catoche, went to the chiefs the night before and 
counselled them to fight us day and night and said that 
they would conquer us as we were few in number; so 
it turned out that we had brought an enemy with us 
instead of a help. 

This Indian whom we despatched with the message 
went off and never returned. From the other two Indian 
prisoners Aguilar the interpreter learnt for certain that by 
the next day the Caciques from all the neighbouring towns 
of the province would have assembled with all their forces 

I 2 



Il6 HORSES DISEMBARKED. 

ready to make war on us, and that they would come and 
surround our camp, for that was Melchorejo's advice to 
them. 

I must leave oflF here, and will go on to tell what we did 
in the matter. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 



How Cortes told us all to get ready by the next day to go in search of 
the Indian host, and ordered the horses to be brought from the 
ships, and what happened in the battle which we fought. 

As soon as Cortes knew for certain that the Indians 
intended to make war on us, he ordered all the horses to 
be landed from the ships without delay, and the cross- 
bowmen and musketeers and all of us soldiers, even those 
who were wounded, to have our arms ready for use. 

When the horses were brought on shore they were very 
stiff and afraid to move, for they had been many days on 
board ship, but the next day they moved quite freely. 

At that time it happened that six or seven soldiers, 
young men and otherwise in good health, suffered from 
pains in their loins, so that they could not stand on their 
feet and had to be carried on men's backs. We did not 
know what this sickness came from, some say that they 
fell ill on account of the [quilted] cotton armour which 
they never took off, but wore day and night, and because 
in Cuba they had lived daintily and were not used to hard 
work, so in the heat they fell ill. Cortes ordered them not 
to remain on land but to be taken at once on board ship. 

The best horses and riders were chosen to form the 
cavalry, and the horses had little bells attached to their 
breastplates. The men were ordered not to stop to spear 
those who were down, but to aim their lances at the faces 
of the enemy. 



PREPARATIONS FOR AN ADVANCE. 1 1/ 

Thirteen gentlemen were chosen to go on horseback 
with Cortes in command of them, and I here record their 
names: — Cortes, Cristóval de Olid, Pedro de Alvarado, 
Alonzo Hernandez Puertocarrero, Juan de Escalante, Fran- 
cisco de Montejo, and Alonzo de Ávíla to whom was 
given the horse belonging to Ortiz the musician and 
Bartolomé Garcia, for neither of these men were good 
horsemen, Juan Velasquez de Leon, Francisco de Morla, 
and Lares the good horseman (I call him so because there 
was another Lares), Gonzalo Dominguez, an excellent 
horseman, Moron of Bayamo, and Pedro Gonzalez of 
Trujillo. Cortes selected all these gentlemen and went 
himself as their captain. 

Cortes ordered Mesa the artilleryman to have his guns 
ready, and he placed Diego de Ordás in command of us 
foot soldiers and he also had command of the musketeers 
and bowmen, for he was no horseman. 

Very early the next day which was the day of Nuestra 
Seiiora de Marzo^ after hearing mass, which was said by 
Fray Bartolomé de Olmedo, we formed in order under 
our standard bearer, who at that time was Antonio de 
Villaroel the husband of Isabel de Ojeda, who afterwards 
changed his name to Antonio Serrano de Cardona, and 
marched to some large savannas where Francisco de 
Lugo and Pedro de Alvarado had been attacked, about 
a league distant from the camp we had left ; and that 
savanna and township was called Cintla, and was subject 
to Tabasco. 

Cortes [and the horsemen] were separated a short dis- 
tance from us on account of some swamps which could 
not be crossed by the horses, and as we were marching 
along in the way I have said, we came on the whole force 
of Indian warriors who were on the way to attack us in our 

^ Lady-day, 25th March. 



Íl8 THE BATTLE OF CINTLA. 

camp. It was near the town of Cintla that we met them 
on an open plain. So it happened that those warriors 
were looking for us with the intention of attacking us, and 
we were looking for them for the very same purpose. I 
must leave off here, and will go on to tell what happened in 
the battle, and one may well call it a battle, as will be 
seen further on. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 



How all the Caciques of Tabasco and its dependencies atttacked us, 
and what came of it. 

I HAVE already said how we were marching along when 
we met all the forces of the enemy which were moving in 
search of us, and all the men wore great feather crests and 
they carried drums and trumpets, and their faces were 
coloured black and white, and they were armed with large 
bows and arrows, lances and shields and swords shaped 
like our two-handed' swords, and many slings and stones 
and fire-hardened jayelins, and all wore quilted cotton 
armour. As they approached us their squadrons were so 
numerous that they covered the whole plain, and they 
rushed on us like mad dogs completely surrounding us, 
and they let fly such a cloud of arrows, javelins and stones 
that on the first assault they wounded over seventy of us, 
and fighting hand to hand they did us great damage with 
their lances, and one soldier^ fell dead at once from an 
arrow wound in the ear, and they kept on shooting and 
wounding us.* With our muskets and crossbows and with 



^ Alonzo Remón Edition says '* a soldier named Saldana." 

* Carta de Vera Cruz says that only twenty were wounded in all, 
and that no one died of their wounds. Gomara says seventy were 
wounded. 



THE BATTLE OF* CINTLA. tlQ 

good sword play we did not fail as stout fighters, and 
when they came to feel the edge of our swords little by 
little they fell back, but it was only so as to shoot at 
us in greater safety. Mesa, our artilleryman, killed many 
of them with his cannon, for they were formed in great 
squadrons and they did not open out so that he could fire 
at them as he pleased, but with all the hurts and wounds 
which we gave them, we could not drive them off. I said 
to Diego de Ordás " it seems to me that we ought to close 
up and charge them," for in truth they suffered greatly 
from the strokes and thrusts of our swords, and that was 
why they fell away from us, both from fear of these 
swords, and the better to shoot their arrows and hurl their 
javelins and the hail of stones. Ordás replied that it was 
not good advice, for there were three hundred Indians to 
every one of us, and that we could not hold out against 
such a multitude, — so there we stood enduring their attack. 
However, we did agree to get as near as we could to them, 
as I had advised Ordás, so as to give them a bad time 
with our swordsmanship, and they suffered so much from 
it that they retreated towards a swamp. 

During all this time Cortes and his horsemen failed to 
appear, although we greatly longed for him, and we feared 
that by chance some disaster had befallen him. 

I remember that when we fired shots the Indians gave 
great shouts and whistles and threw dust and rubbish into 
the air so that we should not see the damage done to 
them, and they sounded their trumpets and drums and 
shouted and whistled and cried " Alala ! alala ! " 

Just at this time we caught sight of our horsemen, 
and as the great Indian host was crazed with its attack on 
us, it did not at once perceive them coming up behind 
their backs, and as the plain was level ground and the 
horsemen were good riders, and many of the horses were 
very handy and fine gallopers, they came quickly on the 



Í20 VICTORY OF THE SPANIARDS. 

enemy and speared them as they chose. As soon as we 
saw the horsemen we fell on the Indians with such energy 
that with us attacking on one side and the horsemen on 
the othfer, they soon turned tail. The Indians thought that 
the horse and its rider was all one animal, for they had 
never seen horses up to this time. 

The savannas and fields were crowded with Indians 
runnin^j to take refuge in the thick woods near by. 

After we had defeated the enemy Cortes told us that he 
had not been able to come to us sooner as there was a 
swamp in the way, and he had to fight his way through 
another force of warriors before he could reach us, and 
three horsemen and five horses had been wounded. 

As soon as the horsemen had dismounted under some 
trees and houses, we returned thanks to God for giving us 
so complete a victory. 

As it was Lady day we gave to the town which was 
afterwards founded here the name of Santa Maria de la 
Victoria, on account of this great victory being won on 
Our Lady's day. This was the first battle that we fought 
under Cortes in New Spain. 

After this we bound up the hurts of the wounded with 
cloths, for we had nothing else, and we doctored the horses 
by searing their wounds with the fat from the body of a 
dead Indian which we cut up to get out the fat, and we 
went to look at the dead lying on the plain and there were 
more than eight hundred of them, the greater number 
killed by thrusts, the others by the cannon, muskets and 
crossbows, and many were stretched on the ground half 
dead. Where the horsemen had passed, numbers of them 
lay dead or groaning from their wounds. The battle lasted 
over an hour, and the Indians fought all the time like brave 
warriors, until the horsemen came up. 

We took five prisoners, two of them Captains. As it 
was late and we had had enough of fighting, and we had 



ALLEGED APPEARANCE OF SANTIAGO. 121 

not eaten anything, we returned to our camp. Then ^e 
buried the two soldiers who had been killed, one by a 
wound in the ear, and the other by a wound in the 11 
throat, and we seared the wounds of the others and of Í; 
the horses with the fat of the Indian, and after posting! 
sentinels and guards, we had supper and rested. 

It is on this occasion that Francisco Lopez de Gomara 
says that Francisco de Morla set out on a dapple gray 
horse before Cortes and the other horsemen arrived, and 
that the sainted apostles Senor Santiago and Senor San 
Pedro appeared. I say that all our doings and our victories 
are at the hands of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that in this 
battle there were so' many Indians to every one of us that 
they could have blinded us with the dust they raised but 
for the pity of God who always helped us. It may be that 
as Gomara says the Glorious Apostles Sefior Santiago and 
Sefior San Pedro came to our aid and that I, being a 
sinner was not worthy to behold them. What I saw was 
Francisco de Morla, on a chestnut horse, who came up at 
the same time as Cortes, and it seems to ^me that now as I , 
write I can see again with these sinful eyes all that battle Í 
in the very way that it took place, and although I ami 
a poor sinner and not worthy to see either of those glorious 
apostles, there were there in our company over four 
hundred soldiers and Cortes himself and many other 
gentlemen, and it would have been talked about, and 
evidence would have been taken, and a church would have 
been built when the town was founded, and the town would 
have been named Santiago de la Victoria, or San Pedro de 
la Victoria instead of Santa Maria de la Victoria. If it 
was as Gomara says we must have all been very bad 
Christians, when our Lord God sent his holy Apostle to us, 
not to recognise the great favour that he was showing to 
us, and not daily to have venerated that church. I wish to 
God it were as the historian Gomara says, but, until I read 



122 MESSENGERS DESPATCHED 

his history, one never heard about it among the conquista- 
dores who were there at the time. 

I will leave off here and go on to tell what else happened 
to us. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 



How Cortes sent to summon all the Caciques of those provinces 
and what was done about it. 

I HAVE already said that we captured five Indians during 

the battle of whom two were captains. When Aguilar 

spoke to these men he found out from what they said that 

they were fit persons to be sent as messengers, and he 

advised Cortes to free them, so that they might go and talk 

to the Caciques of the town and any others they might see. 

These two messengers were given green and blue beads, 

and Aguilar spoke many pleasant and flattering words 

to them, telling them that they had nothing to fear as 

we wished to treat them like brothers, that it was their own 

fault that they had made war on us, and that now they had 

better collect together all the Caciques of the different 

towns as we wished to talk to them, and he gave them 

much other advice in a gentle way so as- to gain their good 

will. The messengers went off willingly and spoke to the 

Caciques and chief men, and told them all we wished them 

to know about our desire for peace. 

When our envoys had been listened to, it was settled 

among them that fifteen Indian slaves, all with stained 

faces and ragged cloaks and loin cloths, should at once 

be sent to us with fowls and baked fish and maize cakes. 

When these men came before Cortes he received them 

graciously, but Aguilar the interpreter asked them rather 

angrily why they had come with their faces in that state, 

that it looked more as though they came to fight than to 

treat for peace; and he told them to go back to the 



TO SUMMON THE CACIQUES. 123' 

Caciques and inform them, that if they wished for peace in 
the way we offered it, chieftains should come and treat 
for it, as was always the custom, and that they should not 
send slaves. But even these painted faced slaves were 
treated with consideration by us and blue beads were sent 
by them in sign of peace, and to soothe their feelings. 

The next day thirty Indian Chieftains, clad in good 
cloaks, came to visit us and brought fowls, fish, fruit and 
maize cakes, and asked leave from Cortes to bum and bury 
the bodies of the dead who had fallen in the recent battles, 
so that they should not smell badly or be eaten by lions 
and tigers. Permission was at once given them and they 
hastened to bring many people to bury and burn the 
bodies according to their customs. 

Cortes learnt from the Caciques that over eight hundred 
men were missing, not counting those who had been carried 
off wounded.^ 

They said that they could not tarry with us either to 
discuss the matter or make peace, for on the morrow 
the chieftains and leaders of all the towns would have 
assembled, and that then they would agree about a peace. 

As Cortes was very sagacious about everything, he said, 
laughing, to us soldiers who happened to be in his 
company, " Do you know, gentlemen, that it seems to me 
that the Indians are terrified at the horses and may think 
that they and the cannon alone make war on them. I have 
thought of something which will confirm this belief, and 
that is to bring the mare belonging to Juan Sedefio, which 
foaled the other day on board ship, and tie her up where 
I am now standing and also to bring the stallion of Ortiz 
the musician, which is very excitable, near enough to 
scent the mare, and when he has scented her to lead 



^ The Carta de Vera Cruz says the Indians were 40^000 in number 
and that they lost 220 killed. 



124 THE CACIQUES ASK PARDON 

each of them off separately so that the Caciques who are 
coming shall not hear the horse neighing as they approach, 
not until they are standing before me and are talking to 
me." We did just as Cortes ordered and brought the 
horse and mare, and the horse soon detected the scent 
of her in Cortés's quarters. In addition to this Cortes 
ordered the largest cannon that we possessed to be loaded 
with a large ball and a good charge of powder. 

About mid-day forty Indians arrived, all of them 
Caciques of good bearing, wearing rich mantles such as are 
used by them. They saluted Cortes and all of us, and 
brought incense and fumigated all of us who were present, 
and they asked pardon for their past behaviour, and said 
that henceforth they would be friendly. 

Cortes, through Aguilar the Interpreter, answered them 
in a rather grave manner, as though he were angry, that 
they well knew how many times he had asked them to 
maintain peace, that the fault was theirs, and that now 
they deserved to be put to death, they and all the people 
of their towns, but that as we were the vassals of a great 
King and Lord named the Emperor Don Carlos, who had 
sent us to these countries, and ordered us to help and 
favour those who would enter his royal service, that if they 
were now as well disposed as they said they were, that 
we would take this course, but that if they were not, some 
of those Te?ustles would jump out and kill them (they call 
iron Tepustle in their language) for some of the Tepustles 
were still angry because thay had made war on us. 
At this moment the order was secretly given to put a 
match to the cannon which had been loaded, and it went 
off with such a thunderclap as was wanted, and the ball 
went buzzing over the hills, and as it was mid-day and 
very still it made a great noise, and the Caciques were 
terrified on hearing it. As they had never seen anything 
like it they believed what Cortes had told them was true. 



AND MAKE PEACE. 12$ 

Then Cortes told them, through Aguilar, not to be afraid 
for he had given orders that no harm should be done 
to them. 

Just then the horse that had scented the mare was 
brought and tied up not far distant from where Cortes was 
talking to the Caciques, and, as the mare had been tied 
up at the place where Cortes and the Indians were talking* 
the horse began to paw the ground and neigh and become 
wild with excitement, looking all the time towards the 
Indians and the place whence the scent of the mare had 
reached him, and the Caciques thought that he was roaring 
at them and they were terrified. When Cortes observed 
their state of mind, he rose from his seat and went to 
the horse and told two orderlies to lead it far away, 
and said to the Indians that he had told the horse not 
to be angry as they were friendly and wished to make 
peace. 

While this was going on there arrived more than thirty 
Indian carriers, whom the natives call Tamenes^ who brought 
a meal of fowls and fish and fruits and other food, and 
it appears that they had lagged behind and could not reach 
us at the same time as the Caciques. 

Cortes had a long conversation with these chieftains and 
Caciques and they told him that they would all come 
on the next day and would bring a present and would 
discuss other matters, and then they went away quite 
contented. 

And there I will leave them until the next day. 



126 FIRST MENTION OF DOSA MARINA. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

How all the Caciques and Calachonis from the Rio de Grijalva came 
and brought a present, and what took place about it. 

Early the next morning, the isth March, 15 19,* many 
Caciques and chiefs of Tabasco and the neighbouring 
towns arrived and paid great respect to us all, and they 
brought a present of gold, consisting of four diadems and 
some gold lizards, and two [ornaments] like little dogs, and 
earrings, and five ducks, and two masks* with Indian faces, 
and two gold soles for sandals, and some other things of 
little value. I do not remember how much the things were 
worth ; and they brought cloth, such as they make and 
wear, which was quilted stuff. My readers will have heard 
from those who know that province that there is nothing 
of much value in it 

This present, however, was worth nothing in comparison 
with the twenty women that were given us, among them 
one very excellent woman called Dofia Marina, for so she 
was named when she became a Christian. I will leave off 
talking about her and the other women who were brought 
to us, and will tell how Cortes received this present with 
pleasure and went aside with all the Caciques, and with 
Aguilar, the interpreter, to hold converse, and he told 
them that he gave them thanks for what they had brought 
with them, but there was one thing that he must ask 
of them, namely, that they should re-occupy the town 
with all their people, women and children, and he wished 
to see it repeopled within two days, for he would 
recognize that as a sign of true peace. The Caciques 



^ This is evidently an error, as Bernal Diaz has already stated that 
the Battle of Cintla was fought on Lady day, the 25th March. 

^ In the text "dos iiguras de Caras de Indios.'' 



THE CACIQUE'S REASONS FOR ATTACKING US. 12/ 

sent at once to summon all the inhabitants with their 
women and children and within two days they were again 
settled in the town. 

One other thing Cortes asked of the chiefs and that was 
to give up their idols and sacrifices, and this they said they 
would do, and, through Aguilar, Cortes told them as well 
as he was able about matters concerning our holy faith, 
how we were Christians and worshipped one true and only 
God, and he showed them an image of Our Lady with her 
precious Son in her arms and explained to them that we 
paid the greatest reverence to it as it was the image of the 
Mother of our Lord God who was in heaven. The Caciques 
replied that they liked the look of the great Teleciguata 
(for in their language great ladies are called Teleciguatas) 
and [begged] that she might be given them to keep in their 
town, and Cortes said that the image should be given to 
them and ordered them to make a well-constructed altar, 
and this they did at once. 

The next morning, Cortes ordered two of our carpenters, 
named Alonzo Yaftez and Alvaro Lopez, to make a very 
tall cross. 

When all this had been settled Cortes asked the Caciques 
what was their reason for attacking us three times when 
we had asked them to keep the peace ; the chief replied that 
he had already asked pardon for their acts and had been 
forgiven, that the Cacique of Chanpoton, his brother, had 
advised it, and that he feared to be accused of cowardice, 
for he had already been reproached and dishonoured for not 
having attacked the other captain who had come with four 
ships, (he must have meant Juan de Grijalva) and he also 
said that the Indian whom we had brought as an Inter- 
preter, who escaped in the night, had advised them to 
attack us both by day and night. 

Cortes then ordered this man to be brought before him 
without fail, but they replied that when he saw that the 



128 " CULUA" AND " MEXICO." 

battle was going against them, he had taken to flight, and 
they knew not where he was although search had been 
made for him ; but we came to know that they had offered 
him as a sacrifice because his counsel had cost them so dear. 

Cortes also asked them where they procured their gold 
and jewels, and they replied, from the direction of the 
setting sun, and said "Culua" and "Mexico," and as we 
did not know what Mexico and Culua meant we paid little 
attention to it. 

Then we brought another interpreter named Francisco, 
whom we had captured during Grijalva's expedition, who 
has already been mentioned by me, but he understood 
nothing of the Tabasco language only that of Culua* which 
is the Mexican tongue. By means of signs he told Cortes 
that Culua was far ahead, and he repeated '' Mexico " 
which we did not understand. 

So the talk ceased until the next day when the sacred 
image of Our Lady and the Cross were set up on the altar 
and we all paid reverence to them, and Padre Fray Barto- 
lomé de Olmedo said mass and all the Caciques and chiefs 
were present and we gave the name of Santa Maria de la 
Victoria to the town, and by this name the town of Tabasco 
is now called. The same friar, with Aguilar as interpreter, 
prea-'hed many good things about our holy faith to the 
twenty Indian women who had been given us, telling them 
not to believe in the Idols which they had been wont to 
trust in, for they were evil things and not gods, and that 
they should offer no more sacrifices to them for they would 
lead them astray, but that they should worship our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and immediately afterwards they were bap- 
tized. One Indian lady who was given to us here was 
christened Dona Marina, and she was truly a great chief- 



^ The word in the text is Cuba, but clearly it must be intended for 
Culua, as is shown in the context. 



DOfÍA MARINA. 1 29 

tainess and the daughter of great Caciques and the mistress 
of vassals, and this her appearance clearly showed. Later 
on I will relate why it was and in what manner she was 
brought here. 

I do not clearly remember the names of all the other 
women, and it is not worth while to name any of them ; 
however, they were the first women to become Christians 
in New Spain. 

Cortes allotted one of them to each of his captains and 
Dofta Marina, as she was good looking and intelligent and 
without embarrassment, he gave to Alonzo Hernandez 
Pucrtocarrero, who I have already said was a distinguished 
gentleman, and cousin of the Count of Medellin. When 
Puertocarrero went to Spain, Doiia Marina lived with 
Cortes, and bore him a son named Don Martin Cortes. 

We remained five days in this town, to look after the 
wounded and those who were suffering from pain in the 
loins, from which they all recovered. Furthermore, Cortes 
drew the Caciques to him by kindly converse, and told 
them how our master the Emperor, whose vassals we were, 
had under his orders many great lords, and that it would 
be well for them also to render him obedience, and that 
then, whatever they might be in need of, whether it was 
our protection or any other necessity, if they would jmake 
it known to him, no matter where he might be, he would 
come to their assistance. 

The Caciques all thanked him for this, and thereupon all 
declared themselves the vassals of our great Emperor. 
These were the first vassals to render submission to His 
Majesty in New Spain. 

Cortes then ordered the Caciques to come with their 
women and children early the next day, which was Palm 
Sunday, to the altar, to pay homage to the holy image 
of Our Lady and to the Cross, and at the same time Cortes 
ordered them to send six Indian carpenters to accompany 

K 



I30 THE PADRE DE LA MERCED CELEBRATES MASS. 

our carpenters to the town of Cintia where our Lord God 
was pleased to give us victory in the battle which I have 
described, there to cut a cross on a great tree called a 
Ceiba which grew there, and they did it so that it might 
last a long time, for as the bark is renewed the cross will 
show there for ever. When this was done he ordered the 
Indians to get ready all the canoes that they owned to 
help us to embark, for we wished to set sail on that 
holy day because the pilots had come to tell Cortes that 
the ships ran a great risk from a Norther which is a 
dangerous gale. 

The next day, early in the morning, all the Caciques and 
chiefs came in their canoes with all their women and 
children and stood in the court where we had placed the 
church and cross, and many branches of trees had already 
been cut ready to be carried in the procession. Then the 
Caciques beheld us all, Cortes, as well as the captains, and 
every one of us marching together with the greatest 
reverence in a devout procession, and the Padre de la 
Merced and the priest, Juan Diaz, clad in their vestments, 
said mass, and we paid reverence to and kissed the Holy 
Cross, while the Caciques and Indians stood looking on 
at us. 

When our solemn festival was over the chiefs approached 
and offered Cortes ten fowls, and baked fish and vegetables, 
and we took leave of them, and Cortes again commended 
to their care the Holy image and the sacred crosses and 
told them always to keep the place clean and well swept 
and to deck the cross with garlands and to reverence it, 
and then they would enjoy good health and bountiful 
harvests. 

It was growing late when we got on board ship and 
the next day, Monday, we set sail in the morning and with 
a fair wind laid our course for San Juan de Ulua, keeping 
close in shore all the time 



VOYAGE CONTINUED. I3I 

As we sailed along in the fine weather, wc soldiers 
who knew the coast would say to Cortes, "Seftor, over 
there is La Rambla, which the Indians call Ayagualulco," 
and soon afterwards we arrived off Tonalá which we called 
San Antonio, and we pointed it out to him. Further on 
we showed him the great river of Coatzacoalcos, and he 
saw the lofty snow capped mountains, and then the Sierra 
of San Martin, and further on we pointed out the split 
rock, which is a great rock standing out in the sea with 
a mark on the top of it which gives it the appearance 
of a seat. Again further on we showed him the Rio de 
Alvarado, which Pedro de Alvarado entered when we were 
with Grijalva, and then we came in sight of the Rio de 
Banderas, where we had gained in barter the sixteen 
thousand dollars, then we showed him the Isla Blanca, and 
told him where lay the Isla Verde, and close in shore we 
saw the Isla de Sacrificios where we found the altars 
and the Indian victinis in Grijalva's time ; and at last our 
good fortune brought us to San Juan de Uliia soon after 
midday on Holy Thursday. 

I remember that a gentleman, Alonzo Hernandez 
Puertocarrero came up to Cortes and said : " It seems 
to me, sir, that these gentlemen who have been twice 
before to this country are saying to you : — 



Cata Francia, Montesinos. 
Cata Paris la ciudad. 
Cata las aguas de Duero 
Do van a dar en la Mar. 



Behold France, Montesinos. 
Look at Paris, the city. 
See the waters of the Duero 
Flowing to the sea. 



I say that you are looking on rich lands, may you 
know how to govern them welll" 

Cortes knew well the purpose for which these words 
were said, and answered : ** Let God give us the good 
fortune in fighting which He gave to the Paladin Roldan, 
and with Your Honour and the other gentlemen for 
leaders, I shall know well how to manage it." 

K 2 



132 THE STORY 

Let us leave off here, for this is what took place and 
Cortes did not go into the Rio de Alvarado, as Gomara 
says he did. 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 



Showing that Dona Marina was a Ccuica and the daughter of persons 
of high rank, and was the mistress of towns and vassals, and how 
it happened that she was taken to Tabasco. 

Before telling about the great Montezuma and his famous 
City of Mexico and the Mexicans, I wish to give some 
account of Dona Marina, who from her childhood had been 
the mistress and Cacica of towns and vassals. It happened 
in this way : 

Her father and mother were chiefs and Caciques of a 
town called Paynala, which had other towns subject to it, 
and stood about eight leagues from the town of Coatza- 
coalcos. Her father died while she was still a little child, 
and her mother married another Cacique, a young man, 
and bore him a son. It seems that the father and mother 
had a great affection for this son and it was agreed between 
them that he should succeed to their honours when their 
days were done. So that there should be no impediment 
to this, they gave the little girl, Dona Marina, to some 
Indians from Xicalango^ and this they did by night so as 
to escape observation, and they then spread the report that 
she had died, and as it happened at this time that a child 
of one of their Indian slaves died they gave out that it was 
their daughter and the heiress who was dead. 

The Indians of Xicalango gave the child to the people 
of Tabasco, and the Tabasco people gave her to Cortes. 
I myself knew her mother, and' the old woman's son and 

^ Xicalango, on the southern side of the Laguna de Términos, was 
an outlying stronghold of the Aztec Empire. (See Relacion de Melchor 
de Sta, Cruz.) 



OF doSta marina. 133 

her half-brother, when he was already grown up and ruled 
the town jointly with his mother, for the second husband 
of the old lady was dead. When they became Christians, 
the old lady was called Marta and the son Lázaro. I knew 
all this very well because in the year 1523 after the con- 
quest of Mexico and the other provinces, when Cristóval 
de Olid revolted in Honduras, and Cortes was -on his way 
there, he passed through Coatzacoalcos and I and the 
greater number of the settlers of that town accompanied 
him on that expedition as I shall relate in the proper 
time and place. As Dofia Marina proved herself such an 
excellent woman and good interpreter throughout the 
wars in New Spain, Tlascala and Mexico (as I shall show 
later on), Cortes always took her with him, and during 
that expedition she was married to a gentleman named 
Juan Jaramillo at the town of Orizaba, before certain 
witnesses, one of whom was named Aranda, a settler in 
Tabasco and this man told [me] about the marriage (not 
in the way the historian Gomara relates it). 

Dofla Marina was a person of the greatest importance 
and was obeyed without question by the Indians through- 
out New Spain. 

When Cortes was in the town of Coatzacoalcos he sent 
to summon to his presence all the Caciques of that 
province in order to make them a speech about our holy 
religion, and about their good treatment, and among the 
Caciques who assembled was the mother of Dona Marina 
and her half-brother, Lázaro. 

Some time before this Dona Marina had told me that 
she belonged to that province and that she was the 
mistress of vassals, and Cortes also knew it well, as did 
Aguilar, the interpreter. In such a manner it was that 
mother, daughter and son came together, and it was easy 
enough to see that she was the daughter from the strong 
likeness she bore to her mother. 



134 THE STORY 

These relations were in great fear of Dona Marina, for 
they thought that she had sent for them to put them to 
death, and they were weeping. 

When Dona Marina saw them in tears, she consoled 
them and told them to have no fear, that when they had 
given her over to the men from Xicalango, they knew not 
what they were doing, and she forgave them for doing it, 
" and she gave them many jewels of gold, and raiment, and 
told them to return to their town, and said that God had 
been very gracious to her in freeing her from the worship 
of idols and making her a Christian, and letting her bear a 
son to her lord and master Cortes and in marrying her to 
such a gentleman as Juan Jaramillo, who was now her 
husband. That she would rather serve her husband and 
Cortes than anything else in the world, and would not 
exchange her place to be Cacica of all the provinces in 
New Spain. 

All this which I have repeated here I know for certain 
(and I swear to it.)^ 

This seems to me very much like what took place 
between Joseph and his brethren in Egypt when they 
came into his power over the matter of the wheat. It 
is what actually happened and not the story which was 
told to Gomara, who also says other things which I will 
leave unnoticed. 

To go back to my subject : Dona Marina knew the 
language of Coatzacoalcos, which is that common to 
Mexico, and she knew the language of Tabasco, as did 
also Jerónimo de Aguilar, who spoke the language of 
Yucatan and Tabasco, which is one and the same. So 
that these two could understand one another clearly, and 
Aguilar translated into Castilian for Cortes. 



^ The words in brackets are blotted out in the original MS. 
-G. G. 



OF DOÍÍA MARINA. 135 

This was the great beginning of our conquests and thus, 
thanks be to God, things prospered with us. I have made 
a point of explaining this matter, because without the help 
of Dona Marina we could not have understood the language 
of New Spain and Mexico. 

Here I will leave off, and go on later to tell how we dis- 
embarked in the Port of San Juan de Ulúa. 




BOOK III. 



T^E MARCH INLAND. 




CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

How we arrived with all the ships at San Juan de Ulúa, and what 
happened there. 

N Holy Thursday, the anniversary of 
the Last Supper of Our Lord, in the 
yeaf 1 5 19, we arrived with all the 
fleet at the Port of San Juan de Uliia, 
and as the Pilot Alaminos knew the 
place well from having come there 
with Juan de Grijalva he at once 
ordered the vessels to drop anchor where they would be 
safe from the northerly gales. The flagship hoisted her 
royal standards and pennants, and within half an hour of 
anchoring, two large canoes (which in those parts are 
called piraguas) came out to us, full of Mexican Indians. 
Seeing the big ship with the standards flying they knew 
that it was there they must go to speak with the captain ; 
so they went direct to the flagship and going on board 
asked who was the Tatuan^ which in their language means 
the chief. Dona Marina who understood the language 
well, pointed him out. Then the Indians paid many marks 

1 Tlatoan. 



SAN JUAN DE ULUA. 1 37 

of respect to Cortes, according to their usage, and bade 
him welcome, and said that their lord, a servant of the 
great Montezuma, had sent them to ask what kind of men 
we were and of what we were in search, and added that if 
we were in need of anything for ourselves or the ships, that 
we should tell them and they would supply it Our Cortes 
thanked them through the two interpreters, Aguilar and 
Doila Marina, and ordered food and wine to be given them 
and some blue beads, and after they had drunk he told 
them that we came to see them and to trade with them 
and that our arrival in their country should cause them no 
uneasiness but be looked on by them as fortunate. The 
messengers returned on shore well content, and the next 
day, which was Good Friday, we disembarked with the 
horses and guns, on some sand hills which rise to a 
considerable height, for there was no level land, nothing 
but sand dunes; and the artilleryman Mesa placed the 
guns in position to the best of his judgment Then we set 
up an altar where mass was said and we made huts 
and shelters for Cortes and the captains, and three hundred 
of the soldiers brought wood and made huts for themselves 
and we placed the horses where they would be safe and in 
this way was Good Friday passed. 

The next day, Saturday, Easter Eve, many Indians 
arrived sent by a chief who was a governor under Monte- 
"^uma, named Pitalpitoque ^ (whom we afterwards called 
Ovandillo), and they brought axes and dressed wood for 
the huts of the captain Cortes and the other ranchos near to 
it, and covered them with large cloths on account of the 
strength of the sun, for as it was in Lent the heat was very 
great — and they brought fowls and maize cakes and plums, 
which were then in season, and I think that they brought 



^ Pitaljpitoaue » Cuitlalpitoc, who had been sent as an ambassador 
to meet Grijalva. See Orozco y Berra^ pp. 44 and 132, vol. iv. 






138 THE GOVERNOR OF THE PROVINCE 

some gold jewels, and they presented all these things 
to Cortes ; and said that the next day a governor would 
come and would bring more food. Cortes thanked them 
heartily and ordered them to be given certain articles in 
exchange with which they went away well content. The 
next day, Easter Sunday, the governor whom they spoke 
of arrived. His name was Tendile,^ a man of affairs, and he 
brought with him Pitalpitoque who was also a man of 
importance amongst the natives and there followed them 
many Indians with presents of fowls and vegetables. 
Tendile ordered these people to stand aside on a hillock 
and with much humility he made three obeisances to 
Cortes according to their custom,* and then to all the 
soldiers who were standing around. Cortes bade them 
welcome through our interpreters and embraced them and 
asked them to wait, as he wished presently to speak 
to them. Meanwhile he ordered an altar to be made as 
well as it could be done in the time, and Fray Bartolomé 
de Olmedo, who was a fine singer, chanted Mass, and 
Padre Juan Diaz' assisted, and the two governors and the 
other chiefs who were with them looked on. When Mass 
was over, Cortes and some of our captains and the two 
Indian officers of the great Montezuma dined together. 
When the tables had been cleared away — Cortes went 
aside with the two Caciques and our two interpreters and 
explained to them that we were Christians and vassals 
of the greatest lord on earth, called the Emperor Don 
Carlos, who had many great princes as his vassals and 
servants, and that it was at his orders that we had come to 
this country, because for many years he had heard rumours 

1 Teuhtlilli, Governor of Cuetlaxtla (Cotaxtla of modem maps). 

* Blotted out in the original—" and they brought much incense on 
live coals in pottery brasiers."— G. G. 

* Blotted out in the original— " and other soldiers who helped 
him."— G. G. 



VISITS THE SPANISH CAMP. 1 39 

about the country and the great prince who ruled it. That/ 
he wished to be friends with this prince and to tell him . 
many things in the name of the Emperor which things,, 
when he knew and understood them, would please him 
greatly. Moreover he wished to trade with their prince 
and his Indians in good friendship, and he wanted to know 
where this prince would wish that they should meet so 
that they might confer together. Tendile replied some- 
what proudly, and said — " You have only just now arrived 
and you already ask to speak with our prince ; accept now 
this present which we give you in his name, and afterwards 
you will tell me what you think fitting." With that he 
took out a petaca — which is a sort of chest, many articles 
of gold beautifully and richly worked and ordered ten loads 
of white cloth made of cotton and feathers to be brought, 
wonderful things to see, and there were other things which 
I do not remember, besides quantities of food consisting of 
fowls of the country,^ fruit and baked fish. Cortes received 
it all with smiles in a gracious manner and gave in return* 
beads of twisted glass and other small beads from Spain, 
and he begged them to send to their towns to ask the 
people to come and trade with us as he had brought many 
beads to exchange for gold, and they replied that they 
would do as he asked. As we afterwards found out, these 
two men, Tendile and Pitalpitoque, were the governors 
of the provinces named Cotustan, Tustepeque,^ Guazpal- 
tepeque and Tatalteco, and of some other townships lately 
conquered. Cortes then ordered his servants to bring an 
arm-chair, richly carved and inlaid and some margaritas? 
stones with many [intricate] designs in them, and a string 



* Turkeys, Huajolotes (Mex.). 

* Cotaxtla, Tuxtepec. 

' Piedras margaritas, possibly margajita ; probably mossagate or 
lapis lazuli. 



140 PICTURES OF THE SPANIARDS 

of twisted glass beads* packed in cotton scented with musk 
and a crimson cap with a golden medal engraved with 
a figure of St George on horseback, lance in hand, slaying 
the dragon, and he told Tendile that he should send 
the chair to his prince Montezuma (for we already knew 
that he was so called) so that he could be seated in it when 
he, Cortes, came to see and speak with him, and that 
he should place the cap on his head, and that the stones 
and all the other things were presents from our lord 
the King, as a sign of his friendship, for he was aware that 
Montezuma was a great prince, and Cortes asked that 
a day and a place might be named where he could go 
to see Montezuma. Tendile received the present and said 
that his lord Montezuma was such a great prince that 
it would please him to know our great King and that 
he would carry the present to him at once and bring back 
a reply. 

It appears that Tendile brought with him some clever 
painters such as they had in Mexico and ordered them 
to make pictures true to nature of the face and body of 
Cortes and all his captains, and of the soldiers, ships, sails 
and horses, and of Dofta Marina and Aguilar, even of the 
two greyhounds, and the cannon and cannon balls, and all 
of the army we had brought with us, and he carried 
the pictures to his master. Cortes ordered our gunners 
to load the lombards with a great charge of powder so that 
they should make a great noise when they were fired 
off, and he told Pedro de Alvarado that he and all the 
horsemen should get ready so that these servants of 
Montezuma might see them gallop and told them to attach 
little bells to the horses' breastplates. Cortes also mounted 
his horse and said — " It would be well if we could gallop 
on these sand dunes but they will observe that even when 

^ Diamantes torcidos. 



ARE DRAWN BY MEXICAN ARTISTS. I4I 

on foot we get stuck in the sand — let us go out to the 
beach when the tide is low and gallop two and two ;" — 
and to Pedro de Alvarado whose sorrel coloured mare was 
a great galloper, and very handy, he gave charge of all the 
horsemen. 

All this was carried out in the presence of the two 
ambassadors, and so that they should see the cannon fired, 
Cortes made as though he wished again to speak to them 
and a number of other chieftains, and the lombards were 
fired off, and as it was quite still at that moment, the 
stones went flying through the forest resounding with a 
great din, and the two governors and all the other Indians 
were frightened by things so new to them, and ordered the 
painters to record them so that Montezuma might see. It 
happened that one of the soldiers had a helmet half gilt but 
somewhat rusty and this Tendile noticed, for he was the 
more forward of the two ambassadors, and said that he 
wished to see it as it was like one that they possessed which 
had been left to them by their ancestors of the race from 
which they had sprung, and that it had been placed on the 
head of their god — Huichilobos,^ and that their prince 
Montezuma would like to see this helmet So it was given 
to him, and Cortes said to them that as he wished to know 
whether the gold of this country was the same as that we 
find in our rivers, they could return the helmet filled with 
grains of gold so that he could send it to our great 
Emperor. After this, Tendile bade farewell to Cortes and 
to all of us and after many expressions of regard from 
Cortes he took leave of him and said that he would return 
with a reply without delay. After Tendile had departed 
we found out that besides being an Indian employed in 
matters of great importance, Tendile was the most active 
of the servants whom his master, Montezuma, had in 

^ Huitzilopochtli. 



142 BARGAINING FOR FOOD. 

his employ, and he went with all haste and narrated 
everything to his prince, and showed him the pictures 
which had been painted and the present which Cortes had 
sent. When the great Montezuma gazed on it he was 
struck with admiration and received it on his part with 
satisfaction. When he examined the helmet and that 
which was on his Huichilobos, he felt convinced that 
we belonged to the race which, as his forefathers had 
foretold would come to rule over that land. It is here that 
the historian Gomara relates many things which were not 
told to him correctly. 

I will leave off here, and then go on to say what else 
happened. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 



How Tendile went to report to bis Prince Montezuma and to carry 
the present, and what we did in our camp. 

When Tendile departed with the present which the 
Captain Cortes gave him for his prince Montezuma, the 
other governor, Pitalpitoque, stayed in our camp and 
occupied some huts a little distance from ours, and they 
brought Indian women there to make maize bread, and 
brought fowls and fruit and fish, and supplied Cortes and 
the captains who fed with him. As for us soldiers, if we 
did not hunt for shell fish on the beach, or go out fishing, 
we did not get anything. 

About that time, many Indians came from the towns 
already mentioned by me over which these two servants of 
Montezuma were governors, and some of them brought 
gold and jewels of little value, and fowls to exchange with 
us for our goods, which consisted of green beads and clear 
glass beads and other articles, and with this we managed 
to supply ourselves with food. Almost all the soldiers had 
brought things for barter, as we learnt in Grijalva's time 



TENDILE RETURNS FROM MEXICO. 143 

that it was a good thing to bring beads — and in this 
manner six or seven days passed by. 

Then one morning, Tendile arrived with more than one 
hundred laden Indians, accompanied by a great Mexican 
Cacique, who in his face, features and appearance bore 
a strong likeness to our Captain Cortes and the great 
Montezuma had sent him purposely, for it is said that 
when Tendile brought the portrait of Cortes all the chiefs 
who were in Montezuma's company said that a great chief 
named Quintalbor looked exactly like Cortes and that was 
the name of the Cacique who now arrived with Tendile ; 
and as he was so like Cortes we called them in camp " our 
Cortes" and " the other Cortes." To go back to my story, 
when these people arrived and came before our Captain 
they first of all kissed the earth^ and then fumigated him 
and all the soldiers who were standing around him, with 
incense which they brought in brasiers of pottery. Cortes 
received them aflFectionately and seated them near himself, 
and that chief who came with the present (who I have 
already said was named Quintalbor) had been appointed 
spokesman together with Tendile. After welcoming us to 
the country and after many courteous speeches had passed 
he ordered the presents which he had brought to be dis- 
played, and they were placed on mats which they call 
petates over which were spread cotton cloths.* The first 
article presented was a wheel like a sun, as big as a cart- 
wheel, with many sorts of pictures on it, the whole of fine 
gold, and a wonderful thing to behold, which those who 
afterwards weighed it said was worth more than ten 
thousand dollars. Then another wheel was presented 
of greater size made of silver of great brilliancy in 

' On seeing Don Hernando Cortes they made the usual obeisance, 
placing the forefinger {dedo mayor) of the right hand on the ground 
and raising it to the mouth, {firozco y Berra, vol. iv, p. 127.) 

^ See Appendix A. Montezuma's gifts to Cortes. 



144 MONTEZUMA'S GIFTS TO CORTES. 

imitation of the moon with other figures shown on it, 
and this was of great value as it was very heavy — and 
the chief brought back the helmet full of fine grains 
of gold, just as they are got out of the mines, and this 
was worth three thousand dollars. This gold in the 
helmet was worth more to us than if it had contained 
$20,000, because it showed us that there were good mines 
there. Then were brought twenty golden ducks, beauti- 
fully worked and very natural looking, and some [orna- 
ments] like dogs, of the kind they keep, and many articles 
of gold worked in the shape of tigers and lions and 
monkeys, and ten collars beautifully worked and other 
necklaces ; and twelve arrows and a bow with its string, 
and two rods like staffs of justice, five palms long, all in 
beautiful hollow work of fine gold. Then there were 
presented crests of gold and plumes of rich green feathers, 
and others of silver, and fans of the same materials, and 
deer copied in hollow gold and many other things that 
I cannot remember for it all happened so many years ago. 
And then over thirty loads of beautiful cotton cloth were 
brought worked with many patterns and decorated with 
many coloured feathers, and so many other things were there 
that it is useless my trying to describe them for I know not 
how to do it When all these things had been presented, 
this great Cacique Quintalbor and Tendile asked Cortes to 
accept this present with the same willingness with which 
his prince had sent it, and divide it among the teules} and 
men who accompanied him. Cortes received the present 
with delight and then the ambassadors told Cortes that 
they wished to repeat what their prince, Montezuma, had 
sent them to say. First of all they told him that he was 
pleased that such valiant men, as he had heard that we 



^ Teules^ "for so they call the Idols which they worship." See 
p. 172. 



THE AMBASSADORS RETURN TO MEXICO. 1 45 

were, should come to his country, for he knew all about 
what we had done at Tabasco, and that he would much 
like to see our great emperor who was such a mighty prince 
and whose fame was spread over so many lands, and that 
he would send him a present of precious stones ; and that 
meanwhile we should stay in that port ; that if he could 
assist us in any way he would do so with the greatest 
pleasure ; but as to the interview, they should not worry 
about it; that there was no need for it and they (the 
ambassadors) urged many objections. Cortes kept a good 
countenance, and returned his thanks to them, and with 
many flattering expressions gave each of the ambassadors 
two holland shirts and some blue glass beads and other 
things, and begged them to go back as his ambassadors to 
Mexico and to tell their prince, the great Montezuma, that 
as we had come across so many seas, and had journeyed 
from such distant lands solely to see and speak with him 
in person, that if we should return thus, that our great king 
and lord would not receive us well, and that wherever their 
prince Montezuma might be we wished to go and see him 
and do what he might order us to do. The ambassadors 
replied that they would go back and give this message to 
their prince, but as to the question of the desired- interview 
— they considered it superfluous. By these ambassadors 
Cortes sent what our poverty could affprd as a gift to 
Montezuma : a glass cup of Florentine ware, engraved with 
trees and hunting scenes and gilt, and three holland shirts 
and other things, and he charged the messengers to bring 
a reply. The two governors set out and Pitalpitoque 
remained in camp ; for it seems that the other servants of 
Montezuma had given him orders to see that food was 
brought to us from the neighbouring towns. Here I will 
leave off*, and then go on to tell what happened in our 
camp. 



146 DISCOVERY OF QUIAHUITZTLAN. 



CHAPTER XL. 

How Cortes sent to look for another harbour and site where to make 
a settlement, and what was done about it. 

As soon as the messengers had been sent off to Mexico, 
Cortes despatched two ships to go and explore the coast 
further along, and placed Francisco de Montejo in com- 
mand of them and ordered him to follow the course 
we had taken with Grijalva (for Montejo had accompanied 
us during Grijalva's expedition) and to seek out a safe 
harbour, and search for lands where we could settle, for it 
was clear that we could not settle on those sand dunes, 
both on account of the mosquitoes and the distance from 
other towns. Cortes ordered Alaminos and Juan Alvarez 
el Manquillo to go as pilots as they knew the route, and 
told them to sail as far along the coast as was possible in 
ten days. They did as they were told and arrived at the 
Rio Grande, which is close to Panuco,^ which we had 
reached during the expedition under the Captain Juan de 
Grijalva. They were not able to proceed any further 
on account of the strong currents. Seeing how difficult 
the navigation had become, they turned round and made 
for San Juan de Uliia, without having made any further 
progress, or having anything to tell us, beyond the news 
that, twelve leagues away, they had seen a town looking 
like a fortified harbour which was called Quiahuitztlan, and 
that near that town was a harbour where the pilot Alaminois 
thought that the ships would be safe from the northerly 
gales. He gave to it an ugly name, that of Bernal, for it 
is like another harbour in Spain of that name. In these 
comings and goings Montejo was occupied ten or twelve 
days, 

1 The expedition under Grijalva did not pass beyond Cape Rojo. 



MONTEZUMA REFUSES TO MEET CORTES. I47 

I must now go back to say that the Indian Pitalpitoque, 
who remained behind to look after the food, slackened his 
efforts to such an extent that no provisions reached the 
camp and we were greatly in need of food, for the cassava 
turned sour from the damp and rotted and became foul 
with weevils and if we had not gone hunting for shell fish 
we should have had nothing to eat. The Indians who used 
to come bringing gold and fowls for barter, did not come 
in such numbers as on our first arrival and those who did 
come were very shy and cautious and we began to count 
the hours that must elapse before the return of the 
messengers who had gone to Mexico. We were thus 
waiting when Tendile returned accompanied by many 
Indians, and after having paid their respects in the usual 
manner by fumigating Cortes and the rest of us with 
incense, he presented ten loads of fine rich feather cloth^ 
and four chalchihuites, which are green stones of very great 
value, and held in the greatest esteem among the Indians, 
more than emeralds are by us, and certain other gold 
articles. Not counting the chalchihuites, the gold alone 
was said to be worth three thousand dollars. Then Tendile 
and Pitalpitoque approached (the other great cacique, 
Quintalbor, fell ill on the road and did not return) and 
those two governors went aside with Cortes and Dona 
Manila and Aguilar, and reported that their prince 
Montezuma had accepted the present and was greatly 
pleased with it, but as to an interview, that no more 
should be said about it; that these rich stones of chal- 
chihuite should be sent to the great Emperor as they were 
of the highest value, each one being worth more and 
being esteemed more highly than a great load of gold, and 
that it was not worth while to send any more messengers 
to Mexico. Cortes thanked the messengers and gave them 
presents, but it was certainly a disappointment to him 
to be told so distinctly that we could not see Montezuma, 

L 2 



148 CORTES TELLS THE MEXICANS 

.and he said to some soldiers who happened to be standing 
near : " Surely this must be a gjreat and rich prince, and 
some day, please God, we must go and see him"— and the 
soldiers answered : " We wish that we were already living 
with him !" 

Let us now leave this question of visits and relate that 
it was now the time of the Ave Maria, and at the sound 
of a bell which we had in the camp we all fell on our knees 
before a cross placed on a sand hill and said our prayers 
of the Ave Maria before the cross. When Tendile and 
Fitalpitoque saw us thus kneeling, as they were very 
intelligent, they asked what was the reason that we 
humbled ourselves before a tree cut in that particular 
way. As Cortes heard this remark he said to the Padre 
de la Merced who was present : " It is a good opportunity, 
father, as we have good material at hand, to explain 
through our interpreters matters touching our holy faith." 
then he delivered a discourse to the Caciques so 
I fitting to the occasion that no good theologian could have 
bettered it After telling them that we were Christians 
and relating all the matters pertaining to our holy religion, 
he told them that their idols were not good but evil things 
which would take flight at the presence of that sign of the 
cross, for on a similar cross the Lord of Heaven and earth 
and all created things suffered passion and death ; that it 
is He whom we adore and in whom we believe, our true 
God, Jesus Christ, who had been willing to suffer and die 
in order to save the whole human race ; that the third 
day He rose again and is now in heaven ; and that by Him 
we shall all be judged. Cortes said many other .things 
very well expressed, which they thoroughly understood, 
and they replied that they would report them to their 
prince Montezuma. Cortes also told them that one of the 
objects for which our great Emperor had sent us to their 
countries W4S to abolish human sacrifices, and the other 



, inrou 
I And 



AfeOUT TtíE CHRISTIAN HELÍGÍON. Í49 

evil rites which they practised and to see that they did not 
rob one another, or worship those cursed images. And 
Cortes prayed them to set up in their city, in the temples 
where they kept the idols which they believed to be gods, a 
cross like the one they saw before them, and to set up 
in the same place an image of Our Lady, which he would 
give them, with her precious son in her arms, and they 
would see how well it would go with them, and what our 
God would do for them. However, as many other argu- 
ments were used and as I do not know how to write them 
all out at length I will leave the subject and recall to mind 
that on this latest visit many Indians came with Tendile, 
who were wishing to barter articles of gold, which, how- 
ever, were of no great value. So all the soldiers set about 
bartering, and the gold which we gained by this barter we 
gave to the sailors who were out fishing in exchange for 
their fish so as to get something to eat, for otherwise 
we often underwent great privations through hunger. 
Cortes was pleased at this although he pretended not to 
see what was going on, and many of the servants and 
friends of Diego Velasquez asked him why he did not 
prevent us from bartering. What happened about this 
I will tell later. 



CHAPTER XLI. 



What was done about the bartering for gold, and other things 
that took place in camp. 

When the friends of Diego Velasquez saw that some of 
us soldiers were bartering for gold, they asked Cortes why 
he permitted it, and said that Diego Velasquez did not 
send out the expedition in order that the soldiers should 
carry oflF most of the gold, and that it would be as well to 
issue an order that for the future no gold should be 



150 DISPUTES ABOUT BARTERING FOR GOLD. 

bartered for by anyone but Cortes himself and that all the 
gold already obtained should be displayed so that the 
royal fifth might be taken from it, and that some suitable 
person should be placed in charge of the treasury. 

To all this Cortes replied that all they said was good, 
and that they themselves should name that person, and 
they chose Gonzalo Mejia. When this had been done, 
Cortes turned to them with angry mien and said : "Observe, 
gentlemen, that our companions are suffering great hard- 
ships from want of food, and it is for this reason that 
we ought to overlook things, so that they may all find 
something to eat ; all the more so as the amount of gold 
they bargain for is but a trifle, — and God willing, we are 
going to obtain a large amount of it However, there are 
two sides to everything ; the order has been issued that 
bartering for gold shall cease, as you desired ; we shall see 
next what we will get to eat" 

This is where the historian, Gomara, states that Cortes 
did this so that Montezuma might think that we cared 
nothing for gold, but he (Gomara) was not well informed, 
for ever • since the event of Grijalva's visit to the Rio 
de Banderas, Montezuma must have understood well 
enough, and even more so when we sent the helmet to him 
with a request that it should be filled with gold grains 
from the mines, besides they had seen us bargaining and 
the Mexicans were not the sort of people to misunderstand 
the meaning of it all. 

Let us drop this subject then, which Gomara says he 
knows about because " they told him so" and 1 will go on 
to relate how, one morning, we woke up to find not a 
single Indian in any of their huts, neither those who used 
to bring the food, nor those who came to trade, nor Pital- 
pitoque himself; they had all fled without saying a word. 
The cause of this, as we afterwards learned, was that 
Montezuma had sent orders to avoid further conversation 



THE ME5C1CAKS t)ESERT THE CAMP. IJl 

with Cortes land those in his company ; for it appears that 
Montezuma was very much devoted to his idols, named 
Tezcatepuca, and Huichilobos, the latter the god of war, 
and Tezcatepuca, the god of hell ; and daily he sacrificed 
youths to them so as to get an answer from the gods as to 
what he should do about us ; for Montezuma had already 
formed a plan, if we did not go off in the ships, to get us 
all into his power, and to raise a breed of us^ and also 
to keep us for sacrifice. As we afterwards found out, the 
reply given by the gods was that he should not listen to 
Cortes, nor to the message which he sent about setting 
up a cross and an image of Our Lady, and that such 
things should not be brought to the city. This was the 
reason why the Indians left our camp without warning. 
When we heard the news we thought that they meant 
to make war on us, and we were very much on the alert. 
One day, as I and another soldier were stationed on some 
sand dunes keeping a look out, we saw five Indians coming 
along the beach, and so as not to raise a scare in camp over 
so small a matter, we permitted them to approach. When 
they came up to us with smiling countenances they paid 
us homage according to their custom, and made signs that 
we should take them into camp. I told my companion to 
remain where he was and I would accompany the Indians, . 
for at that time my feet were not as heavy as they are now 
that I am old, and when we came before Cortes the Indians 
paid him every mark of respect and said : Lope luzio, lope 
luzio — which in the Totonac language means: "prince 
and great lord." Thes2 men had large holes in their lower 
lips, some with stone disks in them spotted with blue, and 
others with thin leaves of gold. They also had their ears 
pierced with large holes in which were placed disks of 



* Blotted out in the original MS. — With which to make war. 
— G. G. 



IS2 MESSENGERS FROM THE TOTONACS. 

Stone or gold, and in their dress and speech they diflfered 
greatly from the Mexicans who had been sta3áng with us. 
When DoSa Marina and Aguilar, the Interpreterji, heard 
the word Lcpe luzio they did not understand it, and Dona 
Marina asked in Mexican if there were not among them 
Nahuatatos, that is, interpreters of the Mexican language, 
and two of the five answered yes^ that they understood and 
spoke it, and they bade us welcome and said that their chief 
had sent them to ask who we might be, and that it would 
please him to be of service to such valiant men, for it 
appeared that they knew about our doings at Tabasco and 
Potonchan, and they added that they would have come to 
see us before but for fear of the people of Culua who had 
been with us, (by Culua they meant Mexicans, as we might 
say Cordovans, or rustics) and that they knew that three 
days ago they had fled back to their own country, and 
in the course of their talk Cortes found out that Monte- 
zuma had opponents and enemies, which he was delighted 
to hear, and after flattering these five messengers and 
giving them presents he bade them farewell, asking them 
to tell their chief that he would very soon come and pay 
them a visit. From this time on we called those Indians 
the Lope luzios. I must leave them now and go on to say 
that in those sand dunes where we were camped there were 
always many mosquitos, both long-legged ones and small 
ones which are called xexenes which are worse than the 
large ones, and we could get no sleep on account of them. 
We were very short of food and the cassava bread was 
disappearing, and what there was of it was very damp and 
foul with weevils. Some of the soldiers who possessed 
Indians in the Island of Cuba were continually sighing for 
their homes, especially the friends and servants of Diego 
Valásquez. When Cortes noted the state of affairs and the 
wishes of these men he gave orders that we should go 
to the fortified town which had been seen by Montejo and • 



DISCONTENT OF THE PARTISANS OP VeLÍSQUEZ. 153 

the pilot, Alaminos, named Quiahuitztlan where the ships 
would be under the protection of the rock which I have 
mentioned. When arrangements were being made for us 
to start, all the friends, relations and servants of Diego 
Velasquez asked Cortes why he wanted to make that 
journey without having any provisions, seeing that there 
was no possibility of going on any further and that over 
thirty five soldiers had already died in camp from wounds 
inflicted at Tabasco, and from sickness and hunger ; that 
the country we were in was a great one and the settlements 
very thickly peopled and that any day they might make 
war on us ; that it would be much better to return to 
Cuba and account to Diego Velasquez for the gold gained 
in barter, which already amounted to a large sum, and the 
great presents from Montezuma, the sun and the silver 
moon and the helmet full of golden grains from the mines, 
and all the cloths and jewels already mentioned by me. 
Cortes replied to them that it was not good advice to 
recommend our going back without reason ; that hitherto 
we could not complain of our fortune and should give 
thanks to God who was helping us in everything, and 
as for those who had died, that that always happened in 
wars and under hardship ; that it would be as well to find 
out what the country contained ; that meanwhile we could 
eat the maize and other food held by the Indians and by 
the neighbouring towns, unless our hands had lost their 
cunning. With this reply, the partisans of Diego Velas- 
quez were somewhat, but not wholly appeased, for there 
were already cliques formed in camp who discussed the 
return to Cuba. I will leave off here and then go on to 
say what happened* 



154 THE PARTISANS OF CORTES 



CHAPTER XLII. 

How we raised Hernando Cortes to the post of Captain General and 
Chief Justice, until His Majesty's wishes on the matter should b^ 
known, and what was done about it. 

I HAVE already said that the relations and friends of Di^o 
Velasquez were going about the camp raising objections 
to our going on any further and insisting that we should 
return at once from San Juan de Ulúa to the Island of 
Cuba. It appears that Cortes had already talked the 
matter over with Alonzo Hernandez Puertocarrero, and 
Pedro de Alvarado and his four brothers, Jorge, GonzaÍo« 
Gomez and Juan, and with Cristobal de Olid, Alonzo 
de Ávila, Juan de Escalante, Francisco de Lugo, and with 
me and other gentlemen and captains, and suggested that 
we should beg of him to be our captain. Francisco de 
Montejo understood what was going on and was on the 
watch. One night, after midnight, Alonzo Hernandez 
Puertocarrero, Juan de Escalante and Francisco de Lugo, 
came to my hut Francisco de Lugo and I came from the 
same country and were distant kinsmen. They said to 
me : " Senor Bernal Diaz, come out with your arms and go 
the rounds ; we will accompany Cortes who is just now 
going the rounds." When I was a little distance from the 
hut they said to me : " Look to it, sir, that you keep secret 
for a time what we wish to tell you, for it is a matter 
of importance, and see that your companions in your hn% 
know nothing about it, for they are of the party of Di^o 
Velasquez." What they said to me was: "Sir, does it 
seem to you to be right that Hernando Cortes should have 
deceived us all in bringing us here, he having proclaimed 
in Cuba that he was coming to settle, and now we find out 
that he has no power to do so, but only to trade, and they 
want us to return to Santiago de Cuba with all the gold 



INTRIGUE ON HIS BEHALF. 1 55 

that has been collected, and we shall lose our all, for will 
not Diego Velasquez take all the gold as he did before ? 
Look, sir, counting this present expedition, you have 
already come to this country three times, spending your 
own property and contracting debts and risking your life 
many times with the wounds you have received. Many of 
us gentlemen who know that we are your honour's friends 
wish you to understand that this must not go on ; that 
this land must be settled in the name of His Majesty, and 
by Hernando Cortes in His Majesty's name, while we 
await the opportunity to make it known to our lord the 
King in Spain. Be sure, sir, to cast your vote so that all 
of us unanimously and willingly choose him captain, for 
it will be a service to God and our lord the King." I 
replied that it was not a wise decision to return to Cuba 
and that it would be a good thing for the country to be 
settled and that we should choose Cortes as General and 
Chief Justice until his Majesty should order otherwise. 
This agreement passed from soldier to soldier and the 
friends and relations of Diego Velasquez, who were more 
numerous than we were, got to know of it, and with over- 
bold words asked Cortes why he was craftily arranging to 
remain in this country instead of returning to render an 
account of his doings to the man who had sent him as 
captain, and they told him that Diego Velasquez would net 
approve of it, and that the sooner we embarked the better ; 
that there was no use in his subterfuges and secret meet- 
ings with the soldiers, for we had neither supplies nor men^ 
nor any possibility of founding a settlement Cortes 
answered without a sign of anger, and said that he agreed 
with them ; that he would not go against the instructions 
and notes which he had received from Diego Velasquez, 
and he issued an order for us all to embark on the 
following day, each one in the ship in which he had come. 
We who had made the agreement answered that it was 



ÍS6 CORTÍS ELECTED CAPTAIN GENERAL. 

not fair to deceive us so, that in Cuba he had proclaimed 
that he was coming to make a settlement, whereas he had 
only come to trade ; and we demanded on behalf of our 
Lord God and of His Majesty that he should at once form 
a settlement and give up any other plan, because that 
would be of the greatest benefit and service to God and 
the King ; and they placed many other well-reasoned 
arguments before him saying that the natives would never 
let us land again as they had done this time, and that 
as soon as a settlement was made in the country soldiers 
would gather in from all the islands to give us help and 
that Velasquez had ruined us all by stating publicly that 
he had received a decree from His Majesty to form a 
settlement, the contrary being the case ; that we wished to 
form a settlement, and to let those depart who desired 
to return to Cuba. So Cortes agreed to it, although he pre- 
tended to need much begging, as the saying goes : " You 
are very pressing, and I want to do it,"^ — and he stipulated 
that we should make him Chief Justice and Captain General, 
and the worst of all that we conceded was that we should 
give him a fifth of all the gold which should be obtainedi 
after the royal fifth had been deducted, and then we gave 
him the very fullest powers in the presence of the King's 
Notary, Diego de Godoy, embracing all that I have here 
stated. We at once set to work to found and settle a 
town, which was called the " Villa rica de la Vera Cruz" 
because we arrived on Thursday of the (last) supper and 
landed on " Holy Friday of the Cross" and " rich" because 
of what that gentleman said, as I have related in a former 
chapter (xxvi) who approached Cortes and said to him : 
" Behold rich lands 1 May you know how to govern them 
well ! " and what he wanted to say was — " May you 



* " Tu me lo ruegas y yo me lo quiero." 



VILLA RICA DE LA VERA CRUZ FOUNDED. 1 57 

remain as their Captain General." That gentleman was 
Alonzo Hernandez Puertocarrero. 

To go back to my story : as soon as the town was 
founded we appointed alcaldes and regidores ; the former 
were Alonzo Hernandez Puertocarrero and Francisco 
Montejo. In the case of Montejo, it was because .he 
was not on very good terms with Cortes that Cortes 
ordered him to be named as Alcalde, so as to place 
him in the highest position. I need not give the names 
of the Regidores, for it is no use naming only a few 
of them ; but I must mention the fact that a pillory was 
placed in the Plaza and a gallows set up outside the 
town. We chose Pedro de Alvarado as captain of ex- 
peditions and Cristobal de Olid as Maestro de Campo.^ 
Juan de Escalante was chosen chief Alguacil f Gonzalo 
Mejia, treasurer, and Alonzo de Ávila accountant. A 
certain Corral was named as Ensign, because Villaroel 
who had been Ensign was dismissed from the post on 
account of some offence (I do not exactly know what) he 
had given Cortes about an Indian woman from Cuba. 
Ochoa, a Biscayan, and Alonzo Romero were appointed 
Alguaciles of the Camp.* 

It will be said that I have made no mention of the 
Captain Gonzalo de Sandoval, he of whom our lord the 
Emperor has heard such reports, who was such a renowned 
captain that he ranked next to Cortes* in our estimation. 
I say this was because at that time he was a youth, and we 
did not take such count of him and of other valiant 
captains until we saw him grow in worth in such a way 
that Cortes and all the soldiers held him in the same 
esteem as Cortes himself, as I shall tell later on. 

* Maestro de Campo= Quartermaster. 

* Alguacil Mayor = High Constable. 

' Alguacil del Real = Constables and storekeepers. 

* Blotted out in the original : " y Pedro de Alvarado."— G. G. 



158 DISPUTES BETWEEN THE PARTISANS 

I must leave my story here and say that the historian, 

Gomara, states that he was told all that which he has 

written down. But I assert that these things happened as 

I have related them. Gomara is wrong in other things 

,that he wrote because his informants did not give him 

.a true account. However good the style may be in which 

! he tells the story, so that all may appear to be true, I 

j assert that all he says about this matter is wrong. 

I will drop the subject now and go on to tell how the 
party of Diego Velasquez tried to stop the election of 
Cortes as captain, and to insist on our returning to the 
Island of Cuba. 



CHAPTER XUn. 

How the party of Diego Velasquez tried to upset the powers we had 
given to Cortes, and what was done about it. 

When the partisans of Diego Velasquez realized the fact 
that we had chosen Cortes for our Captain and Chief 
Justice, and had founded a town and chosen the Alcaldes 
and Regidores, and appointed Pedro de Alvarado as cap- 
tain [of expeditions] and named the Alguacil Mayor and 
Maestro de Campo and had done all that I have narrated, 
they were angry and furious and they began to excite 
factions and meetings and to use abusive language about 
Cortes and those of us who had elected him, saying that it 
was not right to do these things unless all the captains and 
soldiers who had come on the expedition had been parties 
to it ; that Diego Velasquez had given Cortes no such 
powers, only authority to trade, and that we partisans of 
Cortes should take care that our insolence did not so 
increase as to bring us to blows. Then Cortes secretly 
told Juan de Escalante that we should make him pro- 
duce the instructions given him by Diego Velasquez. 



OF CORTfe AfíD OF DIEGO VELÁSQUEZ. 1 59 

Upon this Cortes drew them from his bosom and gave 
them to the King's scribe to read aloud. In these instruc- 
tions were the words : " As soon as you have gained all 
you can by trading, you will return," and the document 
was signed by Diego Velasquez and countersigned by his 
Secretary, Andres de Duero. We begged Cortes to cause 
this document to be attached to the deed recording the 
power we had given him, as well as the proclamation which 
he issued in the Island of Cuba. And this was done so 
that his Majesty in Spain should know that all that we did 
was done in his royal service, and that they should not 
bring against us anything but the truth ; and it was a good 
precaution, seeing how we were treated in Spain by Don 
Juan Rodriguez de Fonseca, Bishop of Burgos and Arch- 
bishop of Rosano (for such were his titles) who, we knew 
for certain, took steps to destroy us as I shall tell later on. 
After this was done, these same friends and dependents 
of Diego Velasquez returned to Cortes to say that it was 
not right that he should have been chosen Captain without 
their consent and that they did not wish to remain under 
his command, but to return at once to the Island of Cuba. 
Cortes replied that he would detain no one by force, and 
that to anyone who came to ask leave to return, he would 
willingly grant it, even although he were left alone. With 
this some of them were quieted, but not Juan Velasquez de 
Leon who was a relation of Diego Velasquez, and Diego 
de Ordás^ and Escobar, whom we called the Page, for he 
had been brought up by Diego Velasquez, and Pedro 
Escudero and other friends of Diego Velasquez ; and it 
came to this, that they refused all obedience to Cortes. 
With our assistance, Cortes determined to make prisoners 
of Juan Velasquez de Leon, and Diego de Ordás, and 
Escobar the Page, and Pedro Escudero and others whose 
names I do not remember, and we took care that the 
others should create no disturbance. These men re- 



l60 PEDRO DE ALVARADO SENT 

mained prisoners for some days, in chains and under 
guard. Í 

I will go on to tell how Pedro de Alvarado made an 
expedition to a town in the neighbourhood. Here^ the 
chronicler, Gomara, in his history gives quite a wrong 
account of what happened, and whoever reads his history 
will see that his story is greatly exaggerated, had he been 
correctly informed he would have related what [really] 
took place. 



CHAPTER XLIV. 



How it was arranged to send Pedro de Alvarado inland to look for 
maize and other supplies and what else happened. 

When all that I have related had been settled and done 
with, it was arranged that Pedro de Alvarado should go 
inland to some towns which we had been told were near 
by and see what the country was like and bring back 
maize and some sort of supplies, for there was a great want 
of food in camp. Alvarado took one hundred soldiers with 
him, among them fifteen crossbowmen and six musketeers. 
More than half his soldiers were partisans of Diego Velas- 
quez. All Cortes' party remained with him for fear there 
should be any further disturbance or tricks played or any 
rising against him, until things became more settled. 

Alvarado went first to some small towns subject to 
another town called Cotastan,^ where the language of 
Culua was spoken. This name, Culua, in this country 
means the common language of the partisans of Mexico 
and Montezuma ; so that in all that country when Culua 
is mentioned, it means people vassal and subject to Mexico, 
and must be thus understood, just as we should speak 
of the Romans and their allies. 

> Cotaxtla. 



ON A FORAGING EXPEDITION. l6l 

When Pedro de Alvarado reached these towns he found 
that they had all been deserted that same day, and he 
found in the cues bodies of men and boys who had been 
sacrificed, and the walls and altars stained with blood and 
the hearts placed as offerings before the Idols. He also 
found the stones on which the sacrifices were made and the 
stone knives with which to open the chest so as to take 
out the heart 

Pedro de Alvarado said that he found most of the bodies 
without arms or legs, and that he was told by some Indians 
that they had been carried off to be eaten, and our soldiers 
were astounded at such great cruelty. I will not say any 
more of the number of sacrifiges, although we found the 
same thing in every town we afterwards entered, and I 
will go back to Pedro de Alvarado and say that he found 
the towns well provisioned but deserted that very day by 
their inhabitants, so that he could not find more than two 
Indians to carry maize, and each soldier had to load him- 
self with poultry and vegetables, and he returned to camp 
without doing any other damage (although he had good 
opportunity for doing it) because Cortes had given orders 
to that effect, so that there should be no repetition of 
what happened at Cozumel. 

We were pleased enough in camp even with the little 
food that had been brought, for all evils and hardships 
disappear when there is plenty to eat. 

Here it is that the historian, Gomara, says that Cortes 
went inland with four hundred soldiers. He was mis- 
informed, for the first to go was [Alvarado] as I have 
stated here, and no other. 

To go back to my story : As Cortes was most energetic 
in every direction, he managed to make friends with the 
partisans of Diego Velasquez, for, with that solvent of 
hardness, presents of gold from our store to some, and 
promises to others, he brought them over to his side, and 

M 



l62 THE SPANIARDS SET OUT 

took them out of prison ; all except Juan Velasquez de 
Leon and Diego de Ordás, who were in irons on board 
ship. These, too, he let out of prison after a few days, and 
made good and true friends of them as will be seen further 
on, — ^and all through gold which is such a pacifier ! 

When everything had been settled, we arranged to go to 
the fortified town already mentioned by me, which was 
called Quiahuitztlan. The ships were to go to the rock 
and harbour which was opposite that town, about a league 
distant from it I remember that as we marched along 
the coast we killed a large fish which had been thrown up 
high and dry by the sea. When we arrived at the river 
where Vera Cruz is now situated^ we found the water to be 
deep, and we crossed over it in some broken canoes like 
troughs, and others crossed by swimming, or on rafts. 

Then we came on some towns subject to the large town 
named Cempoala, whence came the five Indians with the 
golden labrets, who I have already said came as messengers 
to Cortes at the sand dunes, and whom we called Lope 
luzios. We found some idol houses and places of sacrifice, 
and blood splashed about, and incense used for fumigation 
and other things belonging to the idols, and stones with 
which they made the sacrifices, and parrots' feathers and 
many paper books doubled together in folds like Spanish 
cloth ; but we found no Indians, they having already fled, 
for as they had never before seen men like us, nor horses, 
they were afraid. 

We slept there that night, and went without supper, and 
next day, leaving the coast, we continued our march inland 
towards the west, without knowing the road we were 
taking, and we came on some good meadows called 
savanas where deer were grazing, and Pedro de Alvarado 
rode after one on his sorrel mare and struck at it with his 

^ The third site, now known as La Antigua, 



FOR THE TOWN OF QUIAHUITZTLAN. 1 63 

lance and wounded it, but it got away into the woods and 
could not be caught. 

While this was happening we saw twelve Indians ap- 
proaching, inhabitants of the farms where we had passed 
the night. They came straight from their Cacique, and 
brought fowls and maize cakes, and they said to Cortes, 
through our interpreters, that their chief had sent the 
fowls for us to eat, and begged us to come to his town, 
which was, according to the signs they made, distant one 
sun's (that is one day's) march. 

Cortes thanked them and made much of them, and we 
continued our march and slept in another small town, 
where also many ' sacrifices had been made, but as my 
readers will be tired of hearing of the great number of 
Indian men and women whom we found sacrificed in all 
the towns and roads we passed, I shall go on with my 
story without stopping to say any more about them. 

They gave us supper at the little town and we learnt 
that the road to Quiahuitztlan, which I have already said 
is a fortress, passed by Cempoala. I will go on to say how 
we entered Cempoala. 



CHAPTER XLV. 



How we entered Cempoala, which at that time was a very fine town 
and what happened to us there. 

We slept at the little town where the twelve Indians I 
have mentioned had prepared quarters for us, and after 
being well informed about the road which we had to take 
to reach the town on the hill, very early in the morning we 
sent word to the Caciques of Cempoala that we were 
coming to their town and that we hoped they would 
approve. Cortes sent six of the Indians with this message 

M 2 



164 CEMPOALA. 

and kept the other six as guides. He also ordered the 
guns, muskets and crossbows to be kept ready for use, and 
sent scouts on ahead on the look out, and the horsemen 
and all the rest of us were kept on the alert, and in this 
way we marched to within a league of the town. As we 
approached, twenty Indian chieftains came out to receive 
us in the name of the Cacique, and brought some cones 
made of the roses of the country with a delicious scent, 
which they gave to Cortes and those on horseback with 
every sign of friendliness, and they told Cortes that their 
Lord was awaiting us at our apartments, for, as he was a 
very stout and heavy man, he could not come out to 
receive us himself. Cortes thanked them and we continued 
our march, and as we got among the houses and saw what 
a large town it was, larger than any we had yet seen, 
we were struck with admiration. It looked like a garden 
with luxuriant vegetation, and the streets were so full of 
men and women who had come to see us, that we gave 
thanks to God at having discovered such a country. 

Our scouts, who were on horseback, reached a great 
plaza with courts, where they had prepared our quarters, 
and it seems that during the last few days they had been 
whitewashed and burnished, a thing they knew well how 
to do, and it seemed to one of the scouts that this 
white surface which shone so brightly must be silver and he 
came back at full speed to tell Cortes that the walls of the 
houses were made of silver ! Dona Marina and Aguilar 
said that it must be plaster or lime and we had a good 
laugh over the man^s silver and excitement and always 
afterwards we told him that everything white looked to 
him like silver. I will leave our jokes and say that we 
reached the buildings, and the fat Cacique came out to 
receive us in the court. He was so fat that I shall call 
him by this name ; and he made deep obeisance to Cortes 
and fumigated him, as is their custom, and Cortes embraced 



CEMPOALA. 165 

him and we were lodged in fine and large apartments that 
held us all, and they gave us food and brought some 
baskets of plums which were very plentiful at that season, 
and maize cakes, and as we arrived ravenous and had not 
seen so much food for a long time, we called the town 
Villa Viciosa ; and others called it Sevilla. 

Cortes gave orders that none of the soldiers should leave 
the plaza and that on no account should they give any 
offence to the Indians. When the fat Cacique heard that 
we had finished eating he sent to tell Cortes that he wished 
to come and visit him ; and he came in company with a 
great number of Indian chieftains, all wearing large gold 
labrets and rich mantles. Cortes left his quarters to go out 
and meet them, and embraced the Cacique with great show 
of caressing and flattery, and the fat Cacique ordered a 
present to be brought which he had prepared, consisting of 
gold, jewels and cloths ; but although it did not amount to 
much and was of little value he ^aíd to Cortes : " Lope 
luzio^ Lope luzioy accept this in good part ; if I had 
more I would give it to you ! *' I have already said that 
in the Totonac language Lope luzio means Senor or great 
lord. 

Cortes replied through Dofta Marina and Aguilar that 
he would pay for the gift in good works, and that if the 
Cacique would tell him what he wanted to be done that he 
would do it for them for we were the vassals of a great 
prince, the Emperor Don Carlos, who ruled over many 
kingdoms and countries, and had sent us to redress 
grievances and punish evil doers, and to put an end to 
human sacrifices. And he explained to them many things 
touching our holy religion. When the fat Cacique heard 
this, he sighed, and complained bitterly of the great Mon- 
tezuma and his governors saying that he had recently been 
brought under his yoke ; that all his golden jewels had 
been carried off, and he and his people were so grievously 



166 CEMPOALA. 

oppressed, that they dared do nothing without Monte- 
zuma's orders, for he was the Lord over many cities and 
countries and ruled over countless vassals and armies 
of warriors. 

As Cortes knew that he could not attend at that time to 
the complaints which they made, he replied that he would 
see to it that they were relieved of their burdens, that 
he was now on the way to visit his AcaUs (for so they 
call the ships in the Indian language) and take up his 
residence and make his headquarters in the town of 
Quiahuitztlan, and that as soon as he was settled there he 
would consider the matter more thoroughly. To this 
the fat Cacique replied that he was quite satisfied that it 
should be so. 

The next morning we left Cempoala, and there were 
awaiting our orders over four hundred Indian carriers, who 
are here called tamenes who carry fifty pounds weight on 
their backs and march five leagues with it. When we saw 
so many Indians to carry burdens we rejoiced, as before 
this, those of us who had not brought Indians with us from 
Cuba had to carry knapsacks on our own backs. And 
only six or seven Cubans had been brought in the fleet, 
and not a great number as Gomara asserts. Dona Marina 
and Aguilar told us that in these parts in times of peace 
the Caciques are bound to furnish tamenes to carry burdens, 
as a matter of course, and from this time forward wherever 
we went we asked for Indians to carry loads. 

Cortes took leave of the fat Cacique, and on the following 
day we set out on our march and slept at a little town 
which had been deserted near to Quiahuitztlan, and the 
people of Cempoala brought us food. The historian, 
Gomara, says that Cortes remained many days in Cempoala 
and planned a league and rebellion against Montezuma, 
but he was not correctly informed, because, as I have said, 
we left Cempoala on the following morning, and where the 



ARRIVAL AT QUIAHUITZTLAN. 167 

rebellion was planned and what was the reason of it, I will 
relate further on. 

I will pause here and go on to tell how we entered 
Quiahuitztlan. 



CHAPTER XLVI. 



How we entered Quiahuitztlan, which was a fortified town, and were 
peaceably received. 

The next day about ten o'clock we reached the fortified 
town called Quiahuitztlan, which stands amid great rocks 
and lofty cliffs and if there had been any resistance it 
would have been very difficult to capture it. Expecting 
that there would be fighting we kept a good formation with 
the artillery in front and marched up to the fortress in such 
a manner that if anything had happened we could have 
done our duty. 

At this time, Alonzo de Avila was acting as captain, and 
as he was arrogant and bad tempered, when a soldier 
named Hernando Alonzo de Villanueva failed to keep his 
place in the ranks, he gave him a thrust with a lance in his 
arm which maimed him ; and after this Hernando Alonzo 
de Villanueva was always called " El Manquillo."^ It will 
be said* that I am always turning aside to tell old stories, 
so I must leave off and go on to say that we went half way 
through the town without meeting a single Indian to speak 
to, at which we were very much surprised, for they had fled 
in fear that very day when they had seen us climbing up to 
their houses. When we had reached the top of the fortress 
in the plaza near by where they had their cues and great 
idol houses, we saw fifteen Indians awaiting us all clad in 
good mantles, and each one with a brasier in his hand 

^ £1 Manquillo » the one armed or the maimed. 



l68 COMPLAINTS OF MONTEZUMA'S TYRANNY. 

containing incense, and they came to where Cortes was 
standing and fumigated him and all the soldiers who were 
standing near and with deep obeisances they asked pardon 
for not coming out to meet us, and assured us that we 
were welcome and asked us to rest. And they said that 
they had fled and kept out of the way until they could see 
what sort of things we were, for they were afraid of us and 
of our horses, but that night they v^ould order all the people 
to come back to the town. 

Cortes displayed much friendship toward them and told 
them many things about our holy religion ; this we were 
always in the habit of doing wherever we might go. And 
he told them that we were the vassals of our great 
Emperor, Don Carlos, and he gave them some green beads 
and other trifles from Spain, and they brought fowls and 
maize cakes. While we were talking, someone came to 
tell Cortes that the fat Cacique from Cempoala was coming 
in a litter carried on the shoulders of many Indian chief- 
tains. When the fat Cacique arrived he, together with the 
Cacique and chiefs of the town addressed Cortes, relating 
their many causes of complaint against Montezuma and 
telling him of his great power, and this they did with such 
sighs and tears that Cortes and those who were standing 
with him were moved to pity. Besides relating the way 
that they had been brought into subjection, they told us 
that every year many of their sons and daughters were 
demanded of them for sacrifice, and others for service in 
the houses and plantations of their conquerors ; and they 
made other complaints which were so numerous that I 
do not remember them all ; but they said that Montezuma's 
tax gatherers carried off" their wives and daughters if they 
were handsome and ravished them, and this they did 
throughout the land where the Totonac language was 
spoken, which contained over thirty towns. 

Cortes consoled them as well as he was able through our 



MEXICAN TAX GATHERERS. 1 69 

interpreters and said he would help them all he could, and 
would prevent these robberies and offences, as it was for 
that our lord the Emperor had sent us to these parts, 
and that they should have no anxiety, for they would soon 
see what we would do in the matter ; and they seemed to 
gather some satisfaction from this assurance but their 
hearts were not eased on account of the great fear they 
had of the Mexicans. 

While this conversation was going on, some Indians from 
the town came in great haste to tell the Caciques who 
were talking to Cortes, that five Mexicans, who were 
Montezuma's tax gatherers, had just arrived. When they 
heard the news they turned pale and trembled with fear, 
and leaving Cortes alone they went off to receive the 
Mexicans, and in the shortest possible time they had 
decked a room with flowers, and had food cooked for the 
Mexicans to eat, and prepared plenty of cacao, which is 
the best thing they have to drink. 

When these five Indians entered the town, they came to 
the place where we were assembled, where were the houses 
of the Cacique and our quarters, and approaching us with 
the utmost assurance and arrogance, without speaking to 
Cortes or to any of us, they passed us by. Their cloaks 
and loin cloths were richly embroidered (for at that time 
they wore loin cloths), and their shining hair was gathered 
up as though tied on their heads, and each one was 
smelling the roses that he carried, and each had a crooked 
staff in his hand. Their Indian servants carried fly-whisks, 
and they were accompanied by many of the chief men 
of the other Totonac towns, who until they had shown them 
to their lodgings and brought them food of the best, never 
left them. 

As soon as they had dined they sent to summon the 
fat Cacique and the other chiefs, and scolded them for 
entertaining us in their houses, for now they would have to 



I 



170 MEXICAN TAX GATHERERS. 

speak and deal with us which would not please their lord 
Montezuma ; for without his permission and orders they 
should not have sheltered us, nor given us presents of 
golden jewels, and on this subject they uttered many 
threats against the fat Cacique and the other chiefs and 
ordered them at once to provide twenty Indians, men and 
women, to appease their gods for the wrong that had been 
done. 

When he saw what was going on, Cortes asked our 
interpreters, Dofta Marina and Jerónimo de Aguilar why 
the Caciques were so agitated since the arrival of those 
Indians, and who they were. Dofta Marina who under- 
stood full well what had happened, told him what was 
going on ; and then Cortes summoned the fat Cacique and 
the other chiefs, and asked them who these Indians were, 
and why they made such a fuss about them. They replied 
that they were the tax gatherers of the great Montezuma 
and that they had come to inquire why they had received 
us in their town without the permission of their lord, and 
that they now demanded twenty men and women to 
sacrifice to their god, Huichilobos, so that he would give 
them victory over us, for they [the tax gatherers] said that 
Montezuma had declared that he intended to capture and 
make slaves of us. 

Cortes reassured them and bade them have no fear for 
he was here with all of us in his company and that he 
would chastise them [the tax gatherers]. 

In the next chapter I will tell in full what was done 
about it. 



SEIZURE OF THE TAX GATHERERS. 171 



CHAPTER XLVII. 

How Cortes ordered the five tax gatherers of Montezuma to be taken 
prisoners and gave out that from that time forward neither 
obedience nor tribute should be rendered to the Mexicans, and 
how the rebellion against Montezuma was started. 

As soon as Cortes understood what the chiefs were telling 
him, he said that he had already explained to them that 
our lord the King had sent him to chastise evil doers and 
that he would not permit either sacrifice or robbery, and 
that as these tax gatherers had made this demand, he 
ordered them to make prisoners of them at once and to 
hold them in custody until their lord Montezuma should 
be told the reason, namely, how they had come to rob them 
and carry off their wives and children as slaves and commit 
other violence. When the Caciques heard this they were 
thunderstruck at such daring. What !— to order the mes- 
sengers of the great Montezuma to be maltreated? They 
said that they were too much afraid, and did not dare 
to do it. But Cortes went on impressing on them that the 
messengers should be thrown into prison at once, and so it 
was done, and in such a way that with some long poles and 
collars (such as are in use among them) they secured them 
so that they could not escape, and they flogged one of 
them who would not allow himself to be bound. Then 
Cortes ordered all the Caciques to pay no more tribute or 
obedience to Montezuma, and to make proclamation to 
that effect in all their friendly and allied towns, and if 
any tax gatherers came to their other towns, to 
inform him of it, and he would send for them. So the 
news was known throughout that province, for the fat 
Cacique promptly sent messengers to spread the tidings* 
and the chiefs who had come in company with the tax 
gatherers, as soon as they had seen them taken prisoners, 



172 CORTÍS SECRETLY RELEASES 

noised it abroad, for each one returned to his own town 
to deliver the order and relate what had happened. 

When they witnessed deeds so marvellous and of such 
importance to themselves they said that no human beings 
would dare to do such things, and that it was the work of 
Teules, for so they call the idols which they worship, and 
for this reason from that time forth, they called us Teules, 
which, as I have already explained, is as much as to say 
that we were either gods or demons. When in the course 
of my story I may use the word Teule in matters connected 
with our persons, let it be understood that we (Spaniards) 
are meant 

I must go back to tell about the prisoners. It was the 
advice of all the Caciques that they should be sacrificed so 
that none of them could return to Mexico to tell the story; 
but when Cortes heard this he said that they should not 
be killed, and that he would take charge of them, and 
he set some of our soldiers to guard them. At midnight, 
Cortes sent for these soldiers who were in charge and said 
to them : " See to it that two of the prisoners are loosened 
[the two] that appear to you the most intelligent, in such a 
way that the Indians of this town shall know nothing about 
it." And he told them to bring the prisoners to his 
lodging. When the prisoners came before him, he asked 
them through our interpreters why they were prisoners and 
what country they came from, as though he knew nothing 
about them. They replied that the Caciques of Cempoala 
and of this town, with the aid of their followers and ours, 
had imprisoned them, and Cortes answered that he knew 
nothing about it, and was sorry for it, and he ordered food 
to be brought them and talked in a very friendly manner 
to them, and told them to return at once to their lord 
Montezuma and tell him that we were all his good friends 
and entirely at his service, and that lest any harm should 
happen to them he had taken them from their prison, and 



THE MEXICAN TAX GATHERERS. 173 

had quarrelled with the Caciques who had seized them 
and that anything he could do to serve them he would do 
with the greatest good will, and that he would order 
the three Indians their companions who were still held 
prisoners to be freed and protected. That they two should 
go away at once and not turn back to be captured and 
killed. 

The two prisoners replied that they valued his mercy 
and said they still had fear of falling into the hands of 
their enemies, as they were obliged to pass through their 
territory. So Cortes ordered six sailors to take them in a 
boat during the night a distance of four leagues and set 
them on friendly ground beyond the frontier of Cempoala. 
When the morning came and the Caciques of the town and 
the fat Cacique found that the two prisoners were missing 
they were all the more intent on sacrificing those that 
remained, if Cortes had not put it out of their power and 
pretended to be enraged at the loss of the two who had 
escaped. He ordered a chain to be brought from the ships 
and bound the prisoners to it, and then ordered them to be 
taken on board ship, saying that he himself would guard 
them, as such bad watch had been kept over the others. 
When they were once on board he ordered them to be 
freed from their chains and with friendly words he told 
them that he would soon send them back to Mexico. 

I must leave this subject and say that when this was 
done, all the Caciques of this town and of Cempoala, and 
all the other Totonac chiefs who had assembled, asked 
Cortes what was to be done, and that all the force of the 
great Montezuma and of Mexico would descend upon them 
and they could not escape death and destruction. 

Cortes replied with the most cheerful countenance that 
he and his brothers who were here with him would defend 
them and would kill anyone who wished to molest them. 
Then the. Caciques and other townsmen vowed one and all 



174 THE TOTONAC ALLIANCE. 

that they would stand by us in everything we ordered 
them to do and would join their forces [with ours] against 
Montezuma and all his aHies. Then, in the presence of 
Diego de Godoy, the scribe, they pledged obedience to his 
Majesty and messengers were sent to relate all that had 
happened to the other towns in that province. And as 
they no longer paid any tribute and no more tax gatherers 
appeared there was no end to the rejoicing at being rid of 
that tyranny. 

Now, I will leave this incident and tell how we agreed 
to descend to the plain to some fields where we began 
to build a fort. This is what really took place and not the 
story that was told to the historian Gomara.^ 



CHAPTER XLVIII. 



How we determined to found " La Villa Rica de la Vera Cniz" and to 
build a fort in some meadows near the salt marshes, and close to 
the harbour with the ugly name [Bernal] where our ships were at 
anchor, and what we did there. 

As soon as we had made this federation and friendship with 
more than twenty of the hill towns, known as [the towns 
of] the Totonacs, which at this time rebelled against the 
great Montezuma, and gave their allegiance to His Majesty, 
and offered to serve us — we determined with their ready 
help at once to found the Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz on a 
plain half a league from this fortress-like town, called 
Quiahuitztlan, and we laid out plans of a church, market- 
place and arsenals, and all those things that are needed for 
a town, and we built a fort, and from the laying of the 
foundations until the walls were high enough to receive 

^ Blotted out in the original MS. " No matter how eloquently he 
may relate it."— G. G. 



THE BUILDING OF VILLA RICA. 175 

the woodwork, loopholes, watch-towers, and barbicans, we 
worked with the greatest haste. 

Cortes himself was the first to set to work to carry out 
the earth and stone on his back, and to dig foundations, 
and all his captains and soldiers followed his example ; 
and we kept on labouring [without pause] so as to finish 
the work quickly, some of us digging foundations and 
others building walls,^ carrying water, working in the lime 
kilns, making bricks and tiles, or seeking for food. Others 
worked at the timber, and the blacksmiths, for we had two 
blacksmiths with us, made nails. In this way we all 
laboured without ceasing, from the highest to the lowest ; 
the Indians helping us, so that the church and some of the 
houses were soon built and the fort almost finished. 

While we were thus at work, it seems that the great 
Montezuma heard the news in Mexico about the capture of 
his tax gatherers and the rebellion against his rule, and 
how the Totonac towns had withdrawn their allegiance and 
risen in revolt. He showed much anger against Cortes 
and all of us, and had already ordered a great army of 
warriors to make war on the people who had rebelled 
against him, and not to leave a single one of them alive. 
He was also getting ready to come against us with a great 
army with many companies. 

Just at this moment there arrived two Indian prisoners 
whom Cortes had ordered to be set free, as I have related 
in the last chapter, and when Montezuma knew that it was 
Cortes who had taken them out of prison and had sent 
them to Mexico, — and when he heard the words and 
promises which he had sent them to report, it pleased our 
Lord God that his anger was appeased, and he resolved to 
send and gather news of us. For this purpose he despatched 
his two young nephews under the charge of four old men 

^ Tapias « walls made of earth stamped into a mould. 



176 AN EMBASSY FROM MONTEZUMA. 

who were Caciques of high rank, and sent with them a 
present of gold and cloth, and told his messengers to give 
thanks to Cortes for freeing his servants. 

On the other hand, he sent many complaints, saying 
that it was owing to our protection that those towns had 
dared to commit such a great treason as to refuse to pay 
him tribute and to renounce their allegiance to him, and 
that now, having respect for what he knew to be true — that 
we were those whom his ancestors had foretold were to 
come to their country, and must therefore be of his own 
lineage, how was it that we were living in the houses 
of these traitors ? He did not at once send to destroy 
them, but the time would come when they would not brag 
of such acts of treason. 

Cortes accepted the gold and the cloth, which was worth 
more than two thousand dollars, and he embraced the 
envoys and gave as an excuse that he and all of us were 
very good friends of the Lord Montezuma, and that it was 
as his servant that he still kept guard over the three tax 
gatherers, and he sent at once to have them brought from 
the ships — where they had been well treated and well 
clothed, and he delivered them up to the messengers. 

Then Cortes, on his part, complained greatly of Monte- 
zuma, and told the envoys how the Governor, Pitalpitoque, 
had left the camp one night without giving him notice, 
which was not well done and that he believed and felt 
certain that the Lord Montezuma had not authorized any 
such meanness, and that it was on account of this that we 
had come to these towns where we were now residing and 
where we had been well treated by the inhabitants. And 
he prayed him to pardon the disrespect of which the people 
had been guilty. As to what he said about the people no 
longer paying tribute, they could not serve two masters 
and during the time we had been there they had rendered 
service to us in the name of our Lord and King ; but 



AN EMBASSY FROM MONTEZUMA. 1 77 

as he, Cortes, and all his brethren were on their way to 
visit him, and place themselves at his service, that when we 
were once there, then his commands would be attended to. 

When this conversation and more of the same nature 
was over, Cortes ordered blue and green glass beads to 
be given to the two youths, who were Caciques of high 
rank, and to the four old men who had come in charge 
of them, who were also chieftains of importance, and 
paid them every sign of honour. And as there were some 
good meadows in the neighbourhood, Cortes ordered 
Pedro de Alvarado who had a good and very handy sorrel 
mare, and some of the other horsemen, to gallop and 
skirmish before the Caciques, who were delighted at the 
sight of their galloping, and they then took leave of Cortes 
and of all of us well contented, and returned to Mexico. 

About this time Cortes* horse died, and he bought or 
was given another called " El Arriero," a dark chestnut 
which belonged to Ortiz, the musician, and Bartolomé 
Garcia, the miner ; it was one of the best of the horses that 
came in the fleet. 

I must stop talking about this, and relate that as these 
towns of the sierra, our allies, and the town of Cempoala 
had hitherto been very much afraid of the Mexicans, 
believing that the great Montezuma would send his great 
army of warriors to destroy them, when they saw the 
kinsmen of the great Montezuma arriving with the presents 
I have mentioned, and paying such marked respect to 
Cortes and to all of us, they were fairly astounded and the 
Caciques said to one another that we must be Teules for 
Montezuma had fear of us, and had sent us presents of ^ 
gold. If we already had reputation for valour, from this 
time forth it was greatly increased. But I must leave 
off here and go on to say what the fat Cacique and his 
friends were about. 



178 THE TOTONACS BEG FOR HELP 



CHAPTER XLIX. 

How the hX Cacique and other chieftains came to complain to Cortes, 
that in a fortified town named Cingapacinga,^ there was a 
garrison of Mexicans which did them much damage, and what 
was done about it. 

As soon as the Mexican messengers had departed, the fat 
Cacique with many other friendly chieftains, came to beg 
Cortes to go at once to a town named Cingapacinga, two 
days' journey from Cempoala (that is about eight or nine 
leagues)— as there were many warriors of the Culuas, or 
Mexicans, assembled there, who were destroying their crops 
and plantations, and were waylaying and ill-treating their 
vassals, and doing other injuries. Cortes believed the story 
as they told it so earnestly. He had promised that he 
would help them, and would destroy the Culuas and other 
Indians who might annoy them, and noting with what 
importunity they pressed their complaints, he did not 
know what to answer them, unless it were to say that 
he would willingly go, or send some soldiers under one 
of us, to turn these Mexicans out. As he stood there 
thinking the matter over, he said laughingly to some of us 
companions who were with him : " Do you know, gentle- 
men, that it seems to me that we have already gained a 
great reputation for valour throughout this country and that 
from what they saw us do in the matter of Montezuma's 
tax-gatherers, the people here take us for gods or beings 
like their idols. I am thinking that so as to make them 
believe that one of us is enough to defeat those Indian 
warriors, their enemies, who they say are occupying the 
town with the fortress, that we will send Heredia against 

* Not marked on the modern maps. Orozco y Berra (vol. iv, p. 163) 
says that it no longer exists, but that he found it marked in a MS. map 
of Patino under the name of Tizapanecingo, eight or nine leagues 
N.W. of Cempoala, 



AGAINST THEIR ENEMIES. 179 

them/* Now, this old man was a Biscayan musketeer who 
had a bad twitch in his face, a big beard, a face covered 
with scars, and was blind of one eye and lame of one leg. 

Cortes sent for him and said : " Go with these Caciques 
to the river which is a quarter of a league distant, and 
when you get there, stop to drink and wash your hands, 
and fire a shot from your musket, and then I will send 
to call you back. I want this to be done because the 
people here think that we are gods, or at least they have 
given us that name and reputation, and as you are ugly 
enough, they will believe that you are an idol." Heredia 
did what he was told, for he was an intelligent and clever 
man who had been a soldier in Italy, and Cortes sent for 
the fat Cacique and the other chieftains, who were waiting 
for his help and assistance, and said to them : " I am 
sending this brother of mine with you to kill or expel all 
the Culuas from this town you speak of, and to bring me 
here as prisoners all who refuse to leave." The Caciques 
were surprised when they heard this and did not know 
whether to believe it or not, but seeing that Cortes never 
changed his face, they believed that what he told them was 
true. So old Heredia shouldered his musket and set out 
with them, and he fired shots into the air as he went 
through the forest so that the Indians might see and hear 
him. And the Caciques sent word to the other towns that 
they were bringing along a Teule to kill all the Mexicans 
who were in Cingapacinga. I tell this story here merely 
as a laughable incident, and to show the wiles of Cortes. 
When Cortes knew that Heredia had reached the river 
that he had been told about, he sent in haste to call 
him back, and when old Heredia and the Caciques had 
returned, he told them that on account of the good will he 
bore them that he, Cortes himself, would go in person with 
some of his brethren to afford them the help they needed 
and visit the country, and fortresses ; and he ordered them 

N 2 



l8o SOME OF THE SPANIARDS 

at once to bring one hundred Indian carriers to transport 
the tepusques, that is, the cannon, and they came early 
the next morning, and we set out that same day with four 
hundred men and fourteen horsemen, and crossbowmen and 
musketeers who were all ready. Certain soldiers belonging 
to the party of Diego Velasquez refused to go and told 
Cortes that he could set out with those who were willing, 
but that they wished to go back to Cuba. 

What was done about this I will tell in the next chapter. 



CHAPTER L. 

How certain soldiers, partisans of Diego Velasquez, seeing tliat we 
positively intended to make settlements, and establish peace in 
the towns, said that they did not want to go on any expedition, 
but wished to return to the Island of Cuba. 

You have already heard me tell in the preceding chapter 
how Cortes had undertaken to go to a town named 
Cingapacinga, and take with him four hundred soldiers and 
fourteen horsemen and musketeers and crossbowmen, and 
we took good care to make certain soldiers of the party of 
Diego Velasquez go with us. When the officers went to 
warn them to get their arms ready, and those who had 
them to bring their horses, they answered haughtily that 
they did not want to go on any expedition but back to 
their farms and estates in Cuba ; that they had already 
lost enough through Cortes having enticed them from their 
homes, and that he had promised them on the sand dunes 
that whosoever might wish to leave, that he would give 
them permission to do so and a ship and stores for the 
voyage ; and for that reason there were now seven soldiers 
all ready to return to Cuba. When Cortes heard this he 
sent to summon these men before him, and when he asked 
them why they were doing such a mean thing they replied 



WISH to RETURN TO CUBA. l8l 

somewhat indignantly and said that they wondered at his 
honour, with so few soldiers under his command, wishing to 
settle in a place where there were reported to be such 
thousands of Indians and such great towns ; that as for 
themselves, they were invalids and could hardly crawl 
from one place to another and that they wished to return 
to their homes and estates in Cuba, and they asked him to 
grant them leave to depart as he had promised that he 
would do. Cortes answered them gently that it was true 
that he had promised it, but that they were not doing their 
duty in deserting from their captain's flag. And then he 
ordered them to embark at once without any delay and 
assigned a ship to them and ordered them to be furnished 
with cassava bread and a jar of oil and such other supplies 
as we possessed. 

One of these soldiers, a certain Moron, a native of the 
town of Bayamo, owned a good dappled (gray) horse, with 
stockinged fore- feet, and he sold it a good bargain to Juan 
Ruano in exchange for some property which Juan Ruano 
had left in Cuba. 

When these people were ready to set sail, all of us 
comrades, and the Alcaldes and Regidores of our town of 
Villa Rica, went and begged Cortes on no account to allow 
anyone to leave the country, for, in the interest of the 
service of our Lord God and His Majesty, any person 
asking for such permission should be considered as de- 
serving the punishment of death, in accordance with 
military law, as a deserter from his captain and his flag in 
time of war and peril, especially in this case when, as they 
had stated, we were surrounded by such a great number of 
towns peopled by Indian warriors. 

Cortes acted as though he wished to give them leave 
to depart, but in the end he revoked the permission and 
they remained baffled, and even ashamed of themselves ; 
however Moron had sold his horse and Juan Ruano, who 



1 82 THE EXPEDITION 

had possession of it, did not want to give it back again ; 
but Cortes arranged all this and we set out on our expedi- 
tion to Cingapacinga. 



CHAPTER LI. 



What happened to us at Cingapacinga, and how, on our return by 
way of Cempoala, we demolished the idols ; and other things that 
happened. 

As soon as the seven men who wished to return to Cuba 
had calmed down, we set out with the force of horsemen 
and foot soldiers already mentioned, and slept that night 
at the town of Cempoala. Two thousand Indian warriors 
divided into four commands, were all ready to accompany . 
us, and on the first day we marched five leagues in good 
order. The next day, a little after dusk^ we arrived at some 
farms near to the town of Cingapacinga, and the natives of 
the town heard the news of our coming. When we had 
already begun the ascent to the fortress and houses which 
stood amid great cliffs and crags, eight Indian chieftains 
and priests came out to meet us peacefully and asked 
Cortes with tears, why he wished to kill and destroy them 
when they had done nothing to deserve it ; that we had 
the reputation of doing good to all and of relieving those 
who had been robbed, and we had imprisoned the tax 
gatherers of Montezuma ; that these Cempoala Indians 
who accompanied us were hostile to them on account of 
old enmities over the land claims and boundaries, and 
under our protection they had come to kill and rob them. 
It was true, they said, that there was formerly a Mexican 
garrison in the town, but that they had left for their own 
country a few days earlier when they heard that we had 

^ A poco mas de Visperas. 



TO CINGAPACINGA. 1 83 

taken the other tax gatherers prisoners, and they prayed 
us not to let the matter go any further, but to grant them 
protection. When Cortes thoroughly understood what 
they had said through our interpreters, Dofia Marina and 
Aguilar, without delay he ordered Captain Pedro de 
Alvarado, and the quartermaster Cristovól de Olid, and all 
of us comrades who were with him, to restrain the Indians 
of Cempoala and prevent them from advancing ; and this 
we did. But although we made haste to stop them, they 
had already begun to loot the farms. This made Cortes 
very angry and he sent for the captains who had command 
of the Cempoala warriors, and with angry words and serious 
threats, he ordered them to bring the Indian men and 
women and cloths and poultry that they had stolen from 
the farms, and forbade any Cempoala Indian to enter the 
town, and said that for having lied and for having come 
under our protection merely to rob and sacrifice their 
neighbours, they were deserving of death, and that our 
Lord and King, whose servants we were, had not sent us 
to these countries to commit such indignities, and that 
they should keep their eyes wide open in order that such a 
thing did not happen again, otherwise he would not leave 
one of them alive. Then the Caciques and captains of the 
Cempoalans brought to Cortes everything they had seized, 
both Indian men and women and poultry, and he gave 
them all back to their owners and with a face full of wrath 
he turned [to the Cempoalans] and ordered them to retire 
and sleep in the fields — and this they did. 

When the caciques and priests^ of that town saw how 
just we were [in our dealings] and heard the affectionate 
words that Cortes spoke to them through our interpreters, 
including matters concerning our holy religion which it 
was always our custom to explain, and his advice to them 

* Papas. 



184 A Looter púNísHEt). 

to give up human sacrifices and robbing one another, and 
the filthy practice of sodomy, and the worship of their 
cursed Idols, and much other good counsel which he gave 
them, they showed such good will towards us that they 
at once sent to call together the people of the neighbouring 
towns, and all gave their fealty to his Majesty. 

They soon began to utter many complaints against 
Montezuma, just as the people of Cempoala had done 
when we were at the town of Quiahuitztlan. On the 
next morning Cortes sent to summon the captains and 
caciques of Cempoala, who were waiting in the fields to 
know what we should order them to do, and still in terror 
of Cortes on account of the lies they had told him. When 
they came before him he made them make friends with 
the people of the town, a pact which was never broken by 
any of them. 

Then we set out for Cempoala by another road and 
passed through two towns friendly to Cingapacinga, where 
we rested, for the sun was very hot and we were wearied 
with carrying our arms on our backs. A soldier, (a some- 
thing) de Mora, a native of Ciudad-Rodrigo, took two 
chickens from an Indian house in one of the towns, and 
Cortes who happened to see it, was so enraged at that 
soldier for stealing chickens in a friendly town before his 
very eyes, that he immediately ordered a halter to be put 
around his neck, and he would have been hanged there if 
Pedro de Alvarado, who chanced to be near Cortes, had 
not cut the halter with his sword when the poor soldier 
was half dead. I call this story to mind here to show my 
curious readers, and even the priests who nowadays have 
charge of administering the holy sacraments and teaching 
the doctrine to the natives of the country, that because 
the poor soldier stole two fowls in a friendly town, it 
nearly cost him his life, so that they can see how one 
ought to act towards the Indians, and not seize their 



GIFTS OF INDIAN MAIDENS. 185 

property. This same soldier was killed later on in a battle 
fought on a rocky height in the province of Guatemala. 

To go on with my story — when we had left those towns 
in peace and continued our march towards Cempoala, we 
met the fat cacique and other chiefs waiting for us in some 
huts with food, for although they were Indians, they saw 
and understood that justice is good and sacred, and that 
the words Cortes had spoken to them, that we had come to 
right wrongs and abolish tyranny, were in conformity with 
what had happened on that expedition, and they were 
better aflfected towards us than ever before. 

We slept the night in those huts, and all the caciques 
bore us company all the way to our quarters in their town. 
They were really anxious that we should not leave their 
country, as they were fearful that Montezuma would send 
his warriors against them, and they said to Cortes that as 
we were already their friends, they would like to have us 
for brothers, and that it would be well that we should take 
from their daughters, so as to have children by them ; and 
to cement our friendship, they brought eight damsels, all 
of them daughters of caciques, and gave one of these 
cacicas, who was the niece of the fat cacique, to Cortes ; 
and one, who was the daughter of another great cacique, 
(called Cuesco in their language,) was given to Alonzo 
Hernandez Puertocarrero. All eight of them were clothed 
in the rich garments of the country, beautifully ornamented 
as is their custom. Each one of them had a golden collar 
around her neck and golden ear-rings in her ears, and they 
came accompanied by other Indian girls who were to serve 
as their maids. When the fat cacique presented them, Jie 
said to Cortes : " Tecle, (which in their language means 
Lord) — these seven women are for your captains, and this 
one, who is my niece, is for you, and she is the senora of 
towns and vassals." Cortes received them with a cheerful 
countenance and thanked the caciques for the gift, but he 



1 86 THE SPANIARDS DETERMINE 

said that before we could accept them and become brothers, 
they must get rid of those idols which they believed in and 
worshipped, and which kept them in darkness, and must 
no longer offer sacrifices to them, and that when he could 
see those cursed things thrown to the ground and an end 
put to sacrifices that then our bonds of brotherhood would 
be most firmly tied. He added that these damsels must 
become Christians before we could receive them, and the 
people must free themselves from sodomy, for there were 
boys dressed like women who went about for gain by that 
cursed practice, and every day we saw sacrificed before us 
three, four or five Indians whose hearts were offered to the 
idols and their blood plastered on the walls, and the feet, 
arms and legs of the victims were cut off and eaten, just 
as in our country we eat beef brought from the butchers. 
I even believe that they sell it by retail in the tianguez^ as 
they call their markets. Cortes told them that if they gave 
up these evil deeds and no longer practiced them, not 
only would we be their friends, but we would make them 
lords over other provinces. All the caciques, priests, and 
chiefs replied that it did not seem to them good to give up 
their idols and sacrifices and that these gods of theirs gave 
them health and good harvests and everything of which 
they had need ; and that as for sodomy, measures would be 
taken to put a stop to it so that it should no longer be 
practiced. 

When Cortes and all of us who had seen so many 
cruelties and infamies which I have mentioned heard that ' 
disrespectful answer, we could not stand it, and Cortes 
spoke to us about it and reminded us of certain good and 
holy doctrines and said : ** How can we ever accomplish 
anything worth doing if for the honour of God we do not 
first abolish these sacrifices made to idols ?" and he told us 

^ Tianguiz or Tianguiztli. 



TO DESTROY THE INDIAN IDOLS. 1 87 

to be all ready to fight should the Indians try to prevent 
us ; but even if it cost us our lives the idols must come to 
the ground that very day. We were all armed ready for a 
fight as it was ever our custom to be so, and Cortes told 
the caciques that the idols must be overthrown. When 
they saw that we were in earnest, the fat cacique and his 
captains told all the warriors to get ready to defend their 
idols, and when they saw that we intended to ascend a lofty 
cue — which was their temple — which stood high and was 
approached by many steps, — I cannot remember how many 
(steps there were) — the fat cacique and the other chieftains 
were beside themselves with fury and called out to Cortes 
to know why he wanted to destroy their idols, for if we 
dishonoured them and overthrew them, that they would all 
perish and we along with them. Cortes answered them in 
an angry tone, that he had already told them that they 
should offer no more sacrifices to those evil images ; that 
our reason for removing them was that they should no 
longer be deluded, and that either they, themselves, must 
remove the idols at once, or we should throw them out and 
roll them down the steps, and he added that we were no 
longer their friends but their mortal enemies, for he had 
given them good advice which they would not believe ; 
besides he had seen their companies come armed for battle 
and he was angry with them and would make them pay for 
it by taking their lives. 

When the Indians saw Cortes uttering these threats, and 
our interpreter Dona Marina knew well how to make them 
understood, and even threatened them with the power of 
Montezuma which might fall on them any day, out of fear of 
all this they replied that they were not worthy to approach 
their gods, and that if we wished to overthrow them it was 
not with their consent, but that we could overthrow them 
and do what we chose. 

The words were hardly out of their mouths before more 



l88 THE IDOLS OVERTURNEa 

than fifty of us soldiers had clambered up [to the temple] 
and had thrown down their idols which came rolling down 
the steps shattered to pieces. The idols looked like fear- 
some dragons, as big as calves, and there were other figures 
. half men and half great dogs of hideous appearance. When 
they saw their idols broken to pieces the caciques and 
•priests who were with them wept and covered their eyes^ 
and in the Totonac tongue they prayed their gods to 
pardon them, saying that the matter was no longer in their 
hands and they were not to blame, but these Teules who 
had overthrown them, and that they did not attack us on 
account of the fear of the Mexicans. 

When this was over the captains of the Indian warriors 
who, as 1 have said, had come ready to attack us, began to 
prepare to shoot arrows at us, and when we saw this, we 
laid our hands on the fat cacique and the six priests and 
some other chiefs, and Cortes cried out that on the least 
sign of hostility they would all be killed. Then the 
fat cacique commanded his men to retire from our front 
and not attempt to fight, and when Cortes saw them 
calmed, he niade them a speech which I will record later 
on, and thus they were all pacified. 

This affair of Cingapacinga was the first expedition 
made by Cortes in New Spain, and it was very successful, 
and we did not, as the historian Gómara says, kill and 
capture and destroy thousands of men in this affair at 
Cingapacinga, and he who reads this can see how far one 
story differs from the other, and however good the style 
of his history may be, nothing is set down as it really 
happened. 



DESCRIPTION OF THE PRIESTS OF THE IDOLS. 1 89 



CHAPTER LII. 

How Cortes had an altar made and set up an image of Our Lady and 
a Cross, and how mass was said and the eight Indian damsels 
were baptized. 

When the Caciques, priests and chieftains were silenced, 
Cortes ordered all the idols which we had overthrown and 
broken to pieces to be taken out of sight and burned. 
Then eight priests who had charge of the idols came out 
of a chamber and carried them back to the house whence 
they had come, and burned them. These priests wore 
black cloaks like cassocks and long gowns reaching to 
their feet, and some had hoods like those worn by canons, 
and others had smaller hoods like those worn by Domini- 
cans, and they wore their hair very long, down to the 
waist, with some even reaching down to the feet, covered 
with blood and so matted together that it could not be 
separated, and their ears were cut to pieces by way of 
sacrifice, and they stank like sulphur, and they had another 
bad smell like carrion, and as they said, and we learnt that 
it was true, these priests were the sons of chiefs and 
they abstained from women, but they indulged in the 
cursed practice of sodomy, and they fasted on certain day?, 
and what I saw them eat was the pith or seeds of cotton 
when the cotton was being cleaned, but they may have 
eaten other things which I did not see. 

Let us leave the priests and go back to Cortes who made 
them a good speech through our interpreters, Dofia Marina 
and Jerónimo de Aguilar, and told them that now we 
would treat them as brothers and would help them all we 
could against Montezuma and his Mexicans, and we had 
already sent to tell him not to make war on them or levy 
tribute, and that as now they were not to have any more 
idols in their lofty temples he wished to leave with them 



IpO THE HEATHEN TEMPLES ARE PURIFIED. 

a great lady who was the Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ 
whom we believe in and worship, and that they too should 
hold her for Lady and intercessor, and about this matter 
and others which were mentioned he made them an excel- 
lent discourse, so concisely reasoned, considering the time 
at his disposal, that there was nothing left to be said. He 
told them many things about our holy religion as well 
stated as only a priest could do it nowadays, so that it was 
listened to with good will. Then he ordered all the Indian 
mason^n the town to bring plenty of lime so as to clean 
the place and he told them to clear away the blood which 
encrusted the cues and to clean them thoroughly. The 
next day when they were whitewashed, an altar was set up 
with very good altar cloths and he told the Indians to 
bring many of the roses which grew in the country and are 
very sweet-scented, and branches of flowers, and told the 
people to adorn the altar with garlands and always keep 
the place swept and clean. He then ordered four of the 
priests to have their hair shorn, for, as I have already said, 
they wore it long, and to change their garments and clothe 
themselves in white, and always keep themselves clean, and 
he placed them in charge of the altar and of that sacred 
image of our Lady, with orders to keep the place swept 
clean and decked with flowers. So that it should be well 
looked after, he left there as hermit one of our soldiers 
named Juan de Torres de Cordoba, who was old and lame. 
He ordered our carpenters, whose names I have already 
given, to make a cross and place it on a stone support 
which we had already built and plastered over. 

The next morning, mass was celebrated at the altar by 
Padre Fray Bartolomé de Olmedo, and then an 'order was 
given to fumigate the holy image of Our Lady and the 
sacred cross with the incense of the country, and we showed 
them how to make candles of the native wax and ordered 
these candles always to be kept burning on the altar, for 



ALLOTMENT OF INDIAN MAIDENS. I9I 

up to that time they did not know how to use the wax. 
The most important chieftains of that town and of others 
who had come together, were present at the Mass. 

At the same time the eight Indian damsels were brought 
to be made Christians, for they were still in the charge 
of their parents and uncles and they were given to under- 
stand that they must not offer more sacrifices, nor worship 
idols, but believe in our Lord God. ^And they were 
admonished about many things touching our holy religion 
and were then baptized. The niece of the fat Cacique was 
named Dofta Catalina, and she was very ugly ; she was 
led by the hand and given to Cortes who received her and 
tried to look pleased. The daughter of the great Cacique, 
Cuesco, was named Dofta Francisca, she was very 
beautiful for an Indian, and Cortes gave her to Alonzo 
Hernandez Puertocarrero. I cannot now recall to mind 
the names of the other six, but I know that Cortes gave 
them to different soldiers. When this had been done, we 
took leave of all the Caciques and chieftains who from that 
time forward always showed us good will, especially when 
they saw that Cortes received their daughters and that we 
took them away with us, and after Cortes had repeated his 
promises of assistance [against their enemies] we set out 
for our town of Villa Rica. 

What happened there I will speak of later on. This, 
however, is the true account of what took place in the 
town of Cempoala, and differs from the stories told by 
Góniara and the other historians which are all stuff and 
nonsense. 



192 VESSELS ARRIVE FROM CUBA. 



CHAPTER LIII. 

How we returned to Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz and what happened 

there. 

After we had finished our expedition and the people 
of Cempoala and Cingapacinga had been reconciled to one 
another, and the other neighbouring towns had given their 
fealty to His Majesty, and the idols had been overturned 
and the image of Our Lady and the Holy Cross set up in 
their place, and the old soldier placed in charge as hermit, 
and all the other things that I have told about had 
happened, we returned to our settlement and took with us 
certain chieftains from Cempoala. On the day of our 
arrival there came into port a ship from the Island of 
Cuba, under the command of Francisco de Saucedo, whom 
we called ElPulido} We called him this from his excessive 
pride in his good looks and elegance. They say that he 
was a native of Medina Rio Seco, and had been Maestre- 
sale?' to the Admiral of Castille. 

At the same time there arrived Luis Marin (a man 
of great merit who was afterwards a captain in the expedi- 
tion against Mexico) and ten soldiers. Saucedo brought a 
horse, and Luis Marin a mare ; and they brought from 
Cuba the news that the decree had reached Diego Velas- 
quez from Spain giving him authority to trade and found 
settlements, at which his friends were greatly rejoiced, all 
the more when they learned that he had received his com- 
mission appointing him Adelantado of Cuba. 

Being in that town without any plans beyond finishing 
the fort, for we were still at work on it, most of us soldiers 
suggested to Cortes to let the fort stand as it was, for a 

1 The elegant. 

' Maestresala^ the chief waiter at a nobleman's table. 



GIFT OF TREASURE TO THE EMPEROR. 1 93 

memorial, (it was just ready to be roofed), for we had 
already been over three months in the country and it 
seemed to us better to go and see what this great Monte- 
zuma might be like and to earn an honest living and make 
our fortune ; but that before we started on our journey we 
should send our salutations to His Majesty, the Emperor, 
and give him an account of all that had happened since we 
left the Island of Cuba. It also began to be debated 
whether we should send to His Majesty all the gold that 
we had received, both what we had got from barter, as well 
as the presents that Montezuma had sent us. Cortes 
replied that it was a very wise decision and that he had 
already talked to some of the gentlemen about it, and that 
as perchance in this matter of the gold there might be 
some soldiers who wished to keep their shares, and if it 
were divided up there would be very little to send, that for 
this reason he had appointed Diego de Ordás and Francisco 
de Montejo who were good men of business, to go from 
soldier to soldier among those whom it was suspected 
would demand their share of the gold, and say these 
words : " Sirs, you already know that we wish to send His 
Majesty a present of the gold which we have obtained 
here, and as it is the first [treasure] that we are sending 
from this land it ought to be much greater ; it seems to 
us that we should all place at his service the portions that 
fall to our share. We gentlemen and soldiers who have 
here written our names have signed as not wishing to take 
anything, but to give it all voluntarily to His Majesty, so 
that he may bestow favours on us. If anyone wishes for 
his share it will not be refused him, but whoever renounces 
it let him do as we have all done, and sign here." 

In'this way they all signed to a man. When this was 
settled, Alonzo Hernandez Puertocarrero and Francisco de 
Montejo were chosen as proctors to go to Spain, for Cortes 
had already given them over two thousand dollars to keep 

O 



194 LETTERS TO THE EMPEROR. 

them in his interest The best ship in the fleet was got 
ready, and two pilots were appointed, one of them being 
Anton de Alaminos, who knew the passage through the 
Bahama Channel, for he was the first man to sail through 
it, and fifteen sailors were told off, and a full supply of 
ship's stores given to them. When everything was ready, 
we agreed to write to tell His Majesty all that had 
happened. Cortes wrote on his own account, so he told 
us, an accurate narrative of the events, but we did not see 
his letter. 

The Cabildo' wrote a letter jointly with ten of the 
soldiers from among those who wished to settle in the land 
and had appointed Cortes as their general, and the letter was 
drawn up with great accuracy so that nothing was omitted, 
and I put my signature to it ; and besides these letters and 
narratives, all the captains and soldiers together wrote 
another letter and narrative, and what was contained in 
the letter which we wrote is as follows : 



CHAPTER LIV. 



The narrative and letter which we sent to His Majesty by our 
proctors, Alonzo Hernandez Puertocarrero and Francisco de 
Montejo, which letter was signed by a number of the Captains 
and soldiers. 

After beginning with the expressions of well deserved 
respect which were due from us to the great Majesty of the 
Emperor our Lord, for such his Cathoh'c Christian Royal 
Majesty was, and after adding other matters which it was 
appropriate to state in a narrative and account of our doings 
and voyage, each chapter by itself, there followed this, 
which I will here briefly recapitulate. How we sailed from 



1 Cabildo— Municipality, the alguaciles, etc., already mentioned. 



CONTENTS OF THE LETTER. 1 95 

the Island of Cuba with Hernando Cortes ; and the pro- 
clamations which were made ; how we intended coming to 
settle, but that Diego Velasquez was secretly minded to 
trade and not to settle. How Cortes wished to return with 
certain gold gained by barter in accordance with the 
instructions that he brought from Diego Velasquez which 
we have submitted to His Majesty. How we insisted on 
Cortes forming a settlement, and chose him as Captain 
General and Chief Justice, until His Majesty might please 
to order otherwise. How we promised him [Cortes] the fifth 
of what should be obtained, after the Royal fifth had been 
deducted. How we arrived at Cozumel and by what chance 
Jerónimo de Aguilar happened to be at Cape Catoche, 
and about the way he said that he got there, he and a 
certain Gonzalo Guerrero, who remained with the Indians 
because he was married and had children and had already 
become like an Indian. How we arrived at Tabasco, and 
of the war they waged against us, and the battle we fought 
with them, and how we brought them to peace. How that 
wherever we went excellent discourses were addressed to 
them [the Indians] to induce them to abandon their Idols, 
and matters concerning our Holy faith were explained to 
them. How they gave their fealty to His Royal Majesty, 
and became the first vassals that he has in these parts. 
How they [the Indians] brought a present of women, and 
among them a Cacica, for an Indian a woman of great 
importance, who knew the Mexican language, which is the 
language used throughout the country and that with her 
and Aguilar we possessed reliable interpreters. How we 
landed at San Juan de Uliia, and about the speeches of the 
Ambassadors of the Great Montezuma, and who the Great 
Montezuma was and what was said about his greatness, 
and about the present that they brought. How we went 
to Cempoala, which is a large town, and thence to another 
town named Quiahuitztlan, which is fortified, and how in 

O 2 



196 CONTENTS OF THE LETTER 

that town an alliance and confederation was made with us 
and more than thirty towns withdrew their obedience from 
Montezuma, and all gave their fealty to His Majesty and 
are now part of his Royal possessions. The expedition to 
Cingapacinga, how we made a fortress, and that we are 
now on the road to the interior of the country to see 
Montezuma himself. How this country is very lai^e with 
many cities and thickly peopled and the natives are great 
warriors. How there is a great diversity of languages 
among them and they make war one against the other. 
How they are idolators and kill and sacrifice many men, 
women and children, and eat human flesh and practice 
other iniquities. How the first discoverer was Francisco 
Hernandez de Cordova, and Juan de Grijalva came soon 
after and that now at the present time we offer him [His 
Majesty] the gold that we have gained, that is, the golden 
sun and silver moon and a helmet full of gold in grains as 
they take it from the mines, many different kinds of golden 
articles shaped in various ways, and cotton cloths much 
embroidered with feathers, of great excellence, and many 
other golden objects such as fly whisks and shields, and 
other things which, as so many years have already gone by, 
I cannot now call to mind. We also present four Indians 
whom we liberated in Cempoala whom they had kept in 
wooden cages to fatten, so that when they were fat they 
might be sacrificed and eaten. After giving the report of 
this and other things, we gave an account and narration 
of how we, four hundred and fifty soldiers in these his 
Majesty's dominions, were placed in very great danger 
among such a great number of towns, and such quarrel- 
some people and such great warriors, in order to serve 
God and His Royal Crown, and we begged him to show us 
favour in all that we might need, and that he would 
not grant the government of these countries or crown 
offices to any person whatever, for they arc of such quality 



to THE EMÍ>EkÓft. tg^ 

and so rich with such great towns and cities, that they are 
suitable for an Infante or Great Lord, and we are thinking^ 
that as Don Juan Rodriguez de Fonseca, Bishop of Burgos 
and Archbishop of Rosano, is President of the Council and 
rules all the Indies, that he will give it [the government] to 
some relation of his own or to some friend, especially to 
one Diego Velasquez who is governor of the Island of 
Cuba, and the reason why he will give him the government 
or any other office, is that he [Diego Velasquez] is always 
giving him presents of gold and has set apart for him in 
this same island, townships of Indians to get out the gold 
from the mines, and from among these he ought first of all 
to have given the best to the Royal Crown, but he did not 
set aside one of them, and on this account he is not worthy 
to receive favours. As in all things, we are his [Majesty's] 
most loyal servants, and are ready to lay down our 
lives in his service, we inform him of this so that he may 
know all about it and we are determined that until he 
has deigned to permit our proctors, whom we are sending, 
to kiss his feet, and has seen our letter, and until we 
see his Royal signature (when prostrate we may obey 
his Royal commands), that should the Bishop of Burgos 
on his own authority send us any one soever to govern us 
or be our captain, then, before obeying him, we would bring 
it to His Majesty's personal knowledge wherever he may 
be, and that whatever he should order, that would we obey 
as we are bound to do, as the command of our King and 
Lord. 

Besides these narratives, we begged him, until he 
be pleased to order otherwise, to grant the government 
to Hernando Cortes, and we praised him so highly as 
his most obedient servant, as to raise him to the clouds, 
and after having written all these narratives with the 
greatest respect and humility as well as we were able and 
as was proper, explaining every event, how and when and 



icjÁ THE Proctors sail for spaIN. 

in what manner they happened, in the form of a letter 
intended for our King and not in the style that is here set 
down in my story, we captains and soldiers who were on 
the side of Cortes, all of us signed it. Two copies were 
made of the letter, and Cortes begged us to show them 
to him, and when he saw such a true narrative, and the 
great praise which we gave to him, he was very pleased 
and said that he would remember it to our credit and made 
us great promises, but he did not wish us to mention or 
allude to the fifth of the gold that we had promised him, 
nor to say who were the first discoverers, because, as we 
understood, he gave no account in his letter of Francisco 
Hernandez de Cordova nor of Grijalva, but attributed the 
discovery, and the honour and glory of it all, to himself 
alone, and he said that now at this time it would be better 
to write thus, and not to report it to His Majesty. There 
were not wanting those who said to him that to our King 
and Lord nothing that had happened should be left untold. 
When these letters had been written and given to our 
proctors, we impressed on them strongly, that on no 
account should they enter Havana or go to a farm which 
one of them, Francisco de Montejo, owned there, which 
was called E/ Marten and was a harbour for ships, lest 
Diego Velasquez should get to know what was happening. 
They did not do as they were told as I shall show later on. 
When everything was ready for them to embark, the Padre 
de la Merced said Mass, commending them to the guidance 
of the Holy Spirit. 

On the 26th July 1519 they left San Juan de Uliia and 
with good weather, arrived at Havana, and Francisco de 
Montejo with the greatest importunity allured and induced 
the pilot Alaminos to steer to his farm, saying that he was 
going to obtain supplies of pigs and cassava, until he got 
him to do what he wanted which was to drop anchor at his 
farm, for Puertocarrero was very ill and he (Montejo) paid 



THE SHIP TOUCHES AT HAVANA. I99 

no attention to him, and on the very night they arrived 
they despatched a sailor from the ship by land with letters 
and information for Diego Velasquez, and we know that 
Montejo sent the man who went with the letters, and this 
sailor went post haste through the Island of Cuba, from 
town to town making known all that I have here told, 
until Diego Velasquez himself knew it, and what he did 
about it I will tell later on. 



CHAPTER LV. 



How Diego Velasquez, the Governor of Cuba, learned for certain from 
letters, that we were sending proctors with an embassy and 
presents to our King and Lord, and what he did about it. 

As Diego Velasquez the Governor of Cuba learnt the news 
both from the letters which were secretly sent him, (rumour 
said by Montejo) as well as from the sailor, who had been 
present during all that I have related in the last chapter, 
and who swam ashore to carry the letters to him, and when 
he understood about the great present of gold that we were 
sending to His Majesty, and knew who were the Ambas- 
sadors and proctors, he was taken with cold sweats as of 
death and uttered most lamentable words and curses 
against Cortes, and against his own secretary Duero, and 
the accountant Amador de Lares who had advised him to 
make Cortes a general, and he promptly ordered two ships 
of small burden which were fast sailors, to be armed with 
all the artillery and soldiers that could be provided and 
two captains, one named Gabriel de Rojas, and the other 
so and so de Guzman, to go in them and he ordered them 
to go as far as the Havana, and thence to the Bahama 
Channel and in any case to capture and bring the ship 
in which our proctors were sailing and all the gold that 
they were carrying. With all haste, in compliance with his 
commands, they arrived after some days of sailing at the 



2O0 DIEGO VELASQUEZ HEAkS THE NEWS 

Bahama Channel, and asked of some of the vessels which 
were crossing the sea with cargo if they had seen a ship of 
large size go by and all gave news of her and said that she 
would already have passed out of the Bahama Channel, for 
they had had continuous good weather. So after beating 
about with those two ships between the Bahama Channel and 
the Havana and finding no news of what they came to seek 
they returned to Santiago de Cuba, and if Diego Velasquez 
was upset before he despatched the vessels, he was far 
more afflicted when he saw them return in this way, and 
his friends promptly advised him to send to Spain and 
complain to the Bishop of Burgos who was President 
of the Council of the Indies, and was doing much for 
him. He also sent his complaints to the Island of 
Santo Domingo to the Royal Audiencia which resided 
there and to the Jeronimite friars who were governors 
of the Island, named Fray Luis de Figuerea and Fray 
Alonzo de Santo Domingo and Fray Bernadino de 
Manzanedo, and these ecclesiastics were wont to stay and 
reside in the Mejorada Monastery two miles distant from 
Medina del Campo, and he sent a ship post haste to 
them to make many complaints against Cortes and all of 
us. When they came to know about our great services, 
the answer that the Jeronimite fathers gave him was that 
no blame could be laid on Cortes and those who went with 
him, for on all matters we turned to our King and Master, 
and we had sent him so great a present, such as had not 
been seen for a long time past in our Spain, and they said 
this because at that time and season no Peru existed nor 
any thought of it. They also sent to tell him that on the 
contrary we were worthy to receive the greatest favours 
from His Majesty ; at the same time they sent to Cuba a 
Licentiate named Zuazo to take the residencies of Diego 

^ Residencia — that is the examination and formal account demanded 
of a person holding public office. 



AND PkÉPARES ANOtHER F*LEET. 2ÓÍ 

Velasquez, or at least he arrived at the Island a few months 
later, and this same Licentiate made his report to the / 
Jeronimite Friars. When that reply was brought to Diego /. 
Velasquez he was more dismayed than ever, and whereas 
before he was very stout he at this time became thin. With 
the greatest energy he at once ordered all the ships that 
could be found in the Island of Cuba to be searched out 
and soldiers and Captains to be got ready, and he took 
steps to send a* powerful fleet to take Cortes and all of 
us prisoners, and he showed such personal energy, going 
from town to town and from one estate to the other, writing 
to all parts of the Island where he was not able to go 
himself, and entreating his friends to go on that expedition, 
that within eleven months or a year he got together 
eighteen sail, great and small, and over thirteen hundred 
soldiers including captains and seamen, for as they saw 
that he was so zealous and prompt, all the principal 
inhabitants of Cuba, his relations as well as those who 
possessed Indians, got ready to serve him. He sent 
as Captain General of the Fleet a gentleman named 
Pánfilo de Narvaez, a man tall of stature and robust, whose | 
voice sounded hollow as if from a vault : he was a native! 
of Valladolid and married in the Island of Cuba a lady I 
who was already a widow, named Maria de Valenzuela and 
he owned good towns of Indians and was very rich. 

Here I will now leave him, forming and preparing his 
fleet, and will go back to our proctors and their good 
voyage, and as three or four things happened at the same 
time I must leave the story and subject which I was 
discussing, so as to be able to speak of that which is more 
material, and for this reason they must not blame me- 
because I set out and depart from the regular course 
of events in order to speak of what happened later on. 



2Ó2 t)OK JUAN RODRÍGUEZ DE FONSECA 



CHAPTER LVI. 

How our Proctors passed through the Bahama Channel in good 
weather and in a short time arrived in Castille, and what hap- 
pened to them at Court. 

I HAVE already said that our Proctors left the port of San 
Juan de Uliia on the 6th July, 1519, and after a good 
passage they arrived at Havana and they soon passed 
through the Bahama Channel, and it is said that this was 
the first time that it was navigated, and in a short time 
they reach the Islands of Tercera^ and thence went to 
Seville. They journeyed post haste to the court which 
was at Valladolid and to the President of the Royal 
Council of the Indies, Don Juan Rodriguez de Fonseca, 
Bishop of Burgos (who styled himself Archbishop of 
Rosano), and ruled all the Court because our Lord the 
Emperor was absent in Flanders.^ When our proctors 
quite cheerfully, expecting that he would show them 
favour, went to kiss the hands of the President, and to give 
him our letters and narrative and deliver all the gold and 
jewels, and begged him to send a messenger at once to 
His Majesty to hand over to him the present and letters, 
with whom they themselves would go to kiss the Royal 
feet, he received them with such an evil frown and such ill 
will, and even spoke to them contemptuously because they 
had thus addressed him, that our ambassadors were about 
to retort. However, they restrained themselves and replied 
that his Lordship should consider the great services that 
Cortes and his companions were rendering to His Majesty 
and they again begged him at once to send all those 
golden jewels and the letters and narratives to His Majesty 
that he might know what had happened, and that they 

* Terceira in the Azores. 

2 This IS an error ; Charles V was in Catalonia. 



REPRIMANDS tHE 1>R0CT0RS. ÍOj 

would go to him. He retorted very haughtily and even 
ordered that they should not have charge of it [the letters 
and jewels] ; that he himself would write to say what was 
really happening, and not what they reported, for they 
had risen in rebellion against Diego Velasquez ; and many 
other bitter words passed between them. 

At this time Benito Martin, Chaplain to Diego Velas- 
quez, who has been already mentioned by me, arrived 
at Court, and made many complaints against Cortes and 
all of us, which still more incensed the Bishop against 
us. As Alonzo Hernandez Puertocarrero was a gentle- 
man and cousin of the Count de Medellin (for Montejo 
held back and did not dare to displease the President), he 
said to the Bishop that he appealed to him most earnestly 
to listen to them without passion, and not to utter such 
words as he had spoken, and at once to despatch those 
presents as they were brought for His Majesty ; that 
we were most faithful servants of the Royal Crown, and 
worthy of favours and not of insults and rude words. 
When the Bishop heard that, he ordered him to be 
arrested, for he was told that three years before, he 
[Alonzo Puertocarrero] had seized a woman of Medellin 
and carried her off to the Indies. So all our merits and 
presents of gold were in the position that I have here 
related, and our Ambassadors decided to hold their 
tongues until the right time and place should occur. 

The Bishop wrote to inlanders to his Majesty in favour 
of his favourite and friend Diego Velasquez and very evil 
words against Cortes and against all of us, and he made 
no report of the letters that we were bringing him, but 
merely said that Hernando Cortes had risen in rebellion 
against Diego Velasquez, and such-like things. 

Let me go back to say that Alonzo Hernandez Puerto- 
carrero and Francisco de Montejo and even Martin Cortes 
the father of Cortes and a certain Nunez, a licentiate and a 



5Ö4 THE EMPEROk RECEIVES THE LETTEkS 

Reporter of His Majesty's Royal Council and a near rela- 
tion of Cortes, who worked on his behalf, decided to send a 
messenger to Flanders with other letters, the same as those 
they had given to the Bishop, for duplicates had been sent 
by our Proctors, and they wrote to His Majesty an account 
of all that was happening, and a memorandum of the 
golden jewels of the present, and made complaint of the 
Bishop and disclosed his business connection with Diego 
Velasquez. There were even other gentlemen who favoured 
them, those who did not stand well with Don Juan Rodri- 
guez de Fonseca, for it was rumoured that he was generally 
disliked on account of the great injustice and arrogance he 
displayed in the high offices that he held. As our great 
services were for God our Lord and for His Majesty, and 
we always put our full strength into them, it pleased God 
that His Majesty arrived at a clear knowledge of the 
affair and when he saw and understood it he and the 
Duke, Marquises, Counts and other gentlemen who were 
at his royal Court, showed such great satisfaction that they 
talked of nothing else but of Cortes and all of us who were 
helping him in the conquests for several days, and of the 
riches we were sending him from these lands. As for the 
letters of comment which the Bishop of Burgos had written 
to him about the matter, when His Majesty saw that it 
was all contrary to the truth, from then onwards he took a 
particular dislike to the Bishop, especially because he had 
not sent all the articles of gold but had kept back a great 
number of them. The Bishop got to know all this when it 
was written to him from Flanders, and he was very angry 
about it, and if the Bishop had spoken much that was evil 
of Cortes and all of us before our letters had come before 
His Majesty, from that time forward he openly called 
us traitors, but it pleased God that he lost his fury and 
vigour, and within two years he was defied and even 
shamed and dishonoured and we were reputed as ver)* 



AND PROMISES HIS FAVOUR. 205 

loyal subjects, as I shall relate further on when occasion 
arises. His Majesty wrote to say that he was soon coming 
to Castille and would take notice of the matters concerning 
us, and would grant us favours. As I shall later on 
narrate more fully, how and in what manner this happened, 
I will leave the matter here, with our Proctors awaiting the 
arrival of His Majesty. 

Before I go on any further I wish to speak with regard 
to what certain gentlemen who are curious in the matter 
have asked me, and they have a right to know about 
it, how it is that I am able to write down in this narrative 
things that I did not see, as at the time when our Proctors 
delivered the letters, messages, and presents of gold which 
they were carrying for His Majesty and had these disputes 
with the Bishop of Burgos, I was engaged in the conquest | 

of New Spain. I say this, that our Proctors wrote to us 
the true conquistador es, word for word in Chapters, all that 
was happening, both about the Bishop of Burgos, as well I 

as what His Majesty was pleased to promise in our favour, 
and how it all happened ; and Cortes sent us to the towns 
where we were living at the time, other letters that he had 
received from our Proctors that we might see how well 
they negotiated with His Majesty and how hostile the 
Bishop was to us. This I give as an answer to what I 
have been asked. Let us leave this subject and tell in 
another chapter what happened in our camp. 



206 PLOT TO SEIZE A SHIP 

CHAPTER LVII. 

What was done in camp and the judgment which Cortes delivered 
after our ambassadors had departed to go to His Majesty with all 
the gold and letters and narratives. 

Within four days of the departure of our proctors to 
present themselves before our Lord the Emperor, as I 
have already narrated, (as it seems that men's hearts 
are of many kinds and are swayed by different thoughts,) 
some of the friends and dependents of Diego Velasquez, 
named Pedro Escudero, Juan Cermeno, and Gonzalo de 
Umbria a pilot, and Bernaldino de Coria, who was after- 
wards a settler in Chiapas, the father of a certain Centeno' 
and a priest named Juan Diaz, and certain sailors who 
called themselves Penates^, natives of Gibraltar*, who bore 
Cortes ill will, some of them because he had not given 
them leave to return to Cuba when he had promised to do 
so, others because they had not received their shares of the 
gold which had been sent to Spain, and the Penates on 
account of the flogging they had received in Cozumel for 
stealing salt pork from a soldier named Barrio, as I have 
already related. These men determined to seize a small 
ship and sail in her to Cuba to give notice to Diego Velas- 
quez and advise him how at Havana he might be able to 
seize our proctors on the estate of Francisco de Montejo, 
with all the gold and the messages, for it appears that 
they [the conspirators] had been advised by other persons 
in our camp that they [the proctors] would go to that 
estate and they [the other persons] had even written 
to Diego Velasquez that he would have an opportunity 
of capturing them. Thus, these men, whom I have named, 
had already got their stores in the ship, such as cassava 
bread, oil, fish, water, and made other preparations, and the 
time being past midnight, were ready to embark, when 

* Penates = rockmen. * Gibraleon in the text. 



AND SAIL TO CUBA IS FRUSTRATED. 20/ 

one of them (it was a certain Bernaldino de Coria) seems 
to have repented of his wish to return to Cuba, and went 
to report the matter to Cortes. When Cortes heard of it 
and learned how many there were and why they wished to 
get away, and who had given counsel and held the threads 
of the plot, he ordered the sails, compass and rudder to be 
removed at once from the ship, and had the men arrested, 
and their confessions taken down. They all told the truth, 
and their confessions involved in their guilt others who 
were remaining with us, but Cortes kept this quiet at the 
time as there was no other course open to him. The 
sentence which Cortes delivered was that Pedro Escudero 
and Juan Cermeno should be hanged ; that the pilot 
Gonzalo de Umbria, should have his feet cut off, and the 
sailors, Penates, should receive two hundred lashes each, 
and Father Juan Diaz, but for the honour of the church, 
would have been punished as well ; as it was he gave him 
a great fright. I remember that when Cortes signed that 
sentence, he said with great grief and sighs : " Would that 
I did not know how to write, so as not to have to sign 
away men's lives !" — and it seems to me that that saying is 
common among judges who have to sentence men to death, 
and is a quotation taken from that cruel Nero at the time 
when he showed signs of being a good Emperor. 

As soon as the sentence was carried out,^ Cortes rode off 
at break-neck speed for Cempoala which was five leagues 
distant, and ordered two hundred of us soldiers, and all 
the horsemen to follow him ; and I remember that Pedro 
de Alvarado, who three days before had been sent by 
Cortes with two hundred soldiers to the hill towns so as to 
get enough to eat, for in our town there was a great 
scarcity of supplies, was also ordered to go to Cempoala, 

* As the signature of Juan Cermeno is attached to the letter 
written by the army in 1520, it looks as though the sentence was 
not executed. 



208 CORTES ORDERS THE SHIPS 

SO that orders could be there issued for our journey to 
Mexico. So Pedro de Alvarado was not present when, as 
I have described, justice was executed. 

The orders which were issued when we came together in 
Cempoala, I will relate fully further on. 



CHAPTER LVIIL 



How we settled to go to Mexico and to destroy all the ships before 
starting, and what else happened, and how the plan of destroying 
the ships was done by advice and decision of all of us who were 
friends with Cortes. 

Being in Cempoala, as I have stated, and discussing with 
Cortes questions of warfare, and our advance into the 
country, and going on from one thing to another, we, who 
were his friends, counselled him, although others opposed 
it, not to leave a single ship in the port, but to destroy 
them all at once, so as to leave no source of trouble behind, 
lest, when we were inland, others of our people should 
rebel like the last ; besides, we should gain much additional 
strength from the masters, pilots and sailors who numbered 
nearly one hundred men, and they would be better em- 
ployed helping us to watch and fight than remaining 
in port. 

As far as I can make out, this matter of destroying the 
ships which we suggested to Cortes during our conversa- 
tion, had already been decided on by him, but he wished it 
to appear as though it came from us, so that if any one 
should ask him to pay for the ships, he could say that he 
had acted on our advice and we would all be concerned in 
their payment. Then he sent Juan de Escalante (who was 
chief alguacil and a person of distinguished bravery and a 
great friend of Cortes, and an enemy of Diego Velasquez, 
because he had not given him good Indians in the Island 
of Cuba) to Villa Rica with orders to bring on shore all 



OF HIS FLEET TO BE DESTROYED. 209 

the anchors, cables, sails, and everything else on board 
which might prove useful, and then to destroy the ships 
and preserve nothing but the boats, and that the pilots, 
sailing masters and sailors, who were old and no use for 
war, should stay at the town, and with the two nets they 
possessed should undertake the fishing, for there was 
always fish in that harbour, although they were not very 
plentiful. Juan de Escalante did all that he was told to 
do, and soon after arrived at Cempoala with a company 
of sailors, whom he had brought from the ships, and some 
of them turned out to be very good soldiers. 

When this was done, Cortes sent to summon all the 
Caciques of the hill towns who were allied to us and in 
rebellion against Montezuma, and told them how they 
muist give their service to the Spaniards who remained in 
Villa Rica, to finish building the church, fortress and 
houses, and Cortes took Juan de Escalante by the hand 
before them all, and said to them : " This is my brother," 
and told them to do whatever he should order them, and 
that should they need protection or assistance against the 
Mexicans, they should go to him and he would come 
in person to their assistance. 

All the Caciques willingly promised to do what might be 
asked of them, and I remember that they at once fumigated 
Juan de Escalante with incense, although he did not wish 
it done. I have already said that he was a man well 
qualified for any post and a great friend of Cortes, so he 
could place him in command of the town and harbour 
with confidence, so that if Diego Velasquez should send an 
expedition there, it would meet with resistance. I must 
leave him here and go on with my story. 

It is here that the historian Gomara says that when 
Cortes ordered the ships to be scuttled that he did not 
dare to let the soldiers know that he wished to go to 
Mexico in search of the great Montezuma. It was not as 

J' 



210 CORTES ADDRESSES THE TROOPS. 

he States, for what sort of Spaniards should wc be not 
to wish to go ahead, but to linger in places where there was 
neither profit nor fighting? This same Gomara also says 
that Pedro de Ircio remained as captain in Vera Cruz ; he 
was misinformed. I repeat that it was Juan de Escalante 
who remained there as Captain and chief Alguacil of New 
Spain, and that so far, Pedro de Ircio had not been given 
any position whatever — not even charge of a company. 



CHAPTER LIX. 



About a discourse which Cortes made to us after the ships had been 
destroyed, and how we hastened our departure for Mexico. 

When the ships had been destroyed, with our full know- 
ledge, and not [secretly] as is said by the historian Gomara, 
one morning after we had heard mass, when all the captains 
and soldiers were assembled and were talking to Cortes 
about military matters, he begged us to listen to him, and 
argued with us as follows : — 

" We all understood what was the work that lay before 
us, and that with the help of our Lord Jesus Christ we must 
conquer in all battles and encounters [that fell to our lot], 
and must be as ready for them as was befitting, for if we 
were anywhere defeated, which pray God would not happen, 
we could not raise our heads again, as we were so few 
in numbers, and we could look for no help or assistance, 
but that which came from God, for we no longer possessed 
ships in which to return to Cuba, but must rely on our own 
good swords and stout hearts," — and he went on to draw 
many comparisons and relate the heroic deeds of the 
Romans. One and all we answered him that we would 
obey his orders, that the die was cast for good fortune, as 
Caesar said when he crossed the Rubicon, and that we 



A LETTER FROM JUAN DE ESCALANTE. 211 

were all of us ready to serve God and the King. After 
this excellent speech, which was delivered with more 
honied words and greater eloquence than I can express 
here, he [Cortes] at once sent for the fat Cacique and 
reminded him that he should treat the church and cross 
with great reverence and keep them clean ; and he also 
told him that he meant to depart at once for Mexico to 
order Montezuma not to rob or offer human sacrifices, and 
that he now had need of two hundred Indian carriers to 
transport his artillery, for as I have already said these 
Indians can carry two arrobas^ on their backs and march 
five leagues with it. He also asked fifty of the leading 
warriors to go with us. Just as we were ready to set out, 
a soldier, whom Cortes had sent to Villa Rica with orders 
for some of the men remaining there to join him, returned 
from the town bearing a letter from Juan de Escalante, 
saying that there was a ship sailing along the coast, and 
that he had made smoke signals and others, and had raised 
some white cloths as banners, and had galloped along 
on horseback waving a scarlet cape so that those on ship- 
board might see it, and he believed that they had seen 
his signals, banners, horse and cape, but that they did 
not wish to come into the harbour, and that he had sent 
some Spaniards to watch to what place the ships should 
go, and they had reported that the ship had dropped 
anchor near the mouth of a river distant about three leagues, 
and that he wished to know what he should do. 

When Cortes had read the letter he at once ordered 
Pedro de Alvarado to take charge of all his army at 
Cempoala and with him Gonzalo de Sandoval who was 
already giving proofs of being a very valorous man, as he 
always remained. This was the first time that Sandoval 
was given a command, and because he was appointed 

* Two arrobas * 50 lbs. 

^ 2 



212 SHIPS SENT BY FRANCISCO DE GARAY 

to this command, and Alonzo de Ávila was passed over, 
there arose certain irritation between Alonzo de Avila and 
Sandoval. 

Then Cortes rode off at once in company with four 
horsemen, leaving orders for fifty of the most active 
soldiers to follow him, and he named those of us who were 
to form this company and that same night we arrived 
at Villa Rica. What happened there, I will tell further on. 



CHAPTER LX. 



How Cortes went to where the ship was anchored and how we 
captured six of the soldiers and mariners who belonged to the 
ship, and what happened about it. 

When, as I have related, we reached Villa Rica, Juan de 
Escalante came to speak to Cortes and said that it would 
be as well to go to the ship that night, lest she should set 
sail and depart, and that he would go and do this with 
twenty soldiers while Cortes rested himself Cortes replied 
that he could not rest, that " a lame goat must not nap/* 
that he would go in person with the soldiers he had 
brought with him. So before we could get a mouthful of 
food we started to march along the coast and on the 
road we came on four Spaniards who had come to take 
possession of the land in the name of Francisco de Garay 
the governor of Jamaica. These men had been sent by a 
captain named Alonzo Alvarez de Pineda or Pinedo, who 
a few days before had made a settlement on the Rio 
Panuco.* These four Spaniards whom we captured were 
named Guillen de la Loa, who had come as notary, and 
the witnesses he had brought with him to take possession 



1 Pinedo had brought his ships right around the Gulf of Mexico 
from the coast of Florida, See Orozco y Berra^ vol. iv, p. 176. 



Arrive: oíí thE méxicían coasí. át^ 

of the country were Andres Nunez, who was a boat 
builder, another named Master Pedro, he of the harp^ 
from Valencia, and another whose name I cannot now 
remember. 

When Cortes clearly understood that they had come to 
take possession of the country in the name of Francisco de 
Garay, and knew that he was staying behind in Jamaica 
and sending captains to do the work, Cortes asked them by 
what right and title those captains came. The four men re- 
plied that in the year 1 518 as the fame of the lands we had 
discovered by the expeditions of Francisco Hernandez de 
Cordova and Juan de Grijalva and of the twenty thousand 
golden dollars which we had taken to Cuba for Diege 
Velasquez had spread throughout the Islands, that then 
Garay had information from the pilot, Anton de Alaminos, 
and the other pilot who had accompanied us, that he could 
beg from His Majesty the right to all the country he could 
discover from the Rio San Pedro and San Pablo towards 
the north. 

As Garay had friends at Court who could support his 
petition, namely, the Bishop of Burgos, the lawyer Zapata, 
and the secretary Conchillos, he hoped to obtain their 
assistance, and he sent his Mayordomo, named Torralva, to 
negotiate the matter, and this man brought back a com- 
mission for him as Adelantado and Governor of all [the 
land] he could discover [north] of the Rio San Pedro and 
San Pablo. Under this commission he at once despatched 
three ships with about two hundred and seventy soldiers 
and supplies and horses under the captain whom I have 
already mentioned named Alonzo Alvarez Pineda or 
Pinedo, who was settling on the Rio Panuco, about 
seventy leagues away ; and these Spaniards said that they 



^ Maestre Pedro, el de la Arpa :— another named die shipmaster 
(or mate) Pedro, he of the harp (probably a musician). 



5f4 CAPTURE OF SIX SPANIARDS 

were merely doing what their captain told them to do, and 
were in no way to blame. 

When Cortes had learned their business he cajoled them 
with many flattering speeches and asked them whether we 
could capture the ship. Guillen de la Loa, who was the 
leader of the four men, answered that they would wave 
to the ship and do what they could, but although they 
shouted and waved their cloaks and made signals, they 
would not come near, for, as those men said, their captain 
knew that the soldiers of Cortes were in the neighbour- 
hood and had warned them to keep clear of us. 

When we saw that they would not send a boat, we 
understood that they must have seen us from the ship as 
we came along the coast, and that unless we could trick 
them they would not send the boat ashore again. Cortes 
asked the four men to take off their clothes so that four 
of our men could put them on, and when this was done we 
returned along the coast the way we had come, so that 
our return could be seen from the ship and those on board 
might think that we had really gone away. Four of our 
soldiers remained behind wearing the other men's clothes, 
and we remained hidden in the wood with Cortes until past 
midnight, and then when the moon set it was dark enough 
to return to the mouth of the creek, but we kept well 
hidden so that only the four soldiers could be seen. When 
the dawn broke the four soldiers began to wave their 
cloaks to the ship, and six sailors put off from her in 
a boat. Two of the sailors jumped ashore to fill two jugs 
with water and we who were with Cortes kept in hiding 
waiting for the other sailors to land ; but they stayed 
where they were and our four soldiers who were wearing 
the clothes of Garay's people pretended that they were 
washing their hands and kept their faces hidden. The 
men in the boat cried out : " Come on board, what are you 
doing ? Why don't you come ? " One of our men answered : 



tROkí PÍNEDO^S wSHlf. 51$ 

" Come on shore for a minute and you will see." As they 
did not know his voice, they pushed off with their boat, 
and although we shouted to them they would answer 
nothing. We wanted to shoot at them with muskets and 
cross bows, but Cortes would not allow it, and said : " Let 
them go in peace and report to their captain." 

So six soldiers from that ship remained in our company, 
the four we had first captured, and the two sailors who had 
come ashore. And we returned to Villa Rica without 
having had anything to eat since we first started. 

This is really what happened and not what the historian 
Gomara relates, for he says that Garay came at this 
time ; but it was not so, for before he himself came he 
first sent three captains with ships, and later on I will 
explain at what time they came and what happened to 
them, and I will tell, as well, about the coming of Garay. 
But we must get on now and I will relate how we settled 
to go to Mexico. 



The March from Cempoala to Tlaxcala. 
Introductory Note to Chapter LXL 

The Spaniards left Cempoala on the i6th August and crossed the 
frontier into Tlaxcalan territory on the 31st August. 

Bernal Diaz says that they reached Jalapa on the first day, but that 
is not probable. Between Jalapa and Ixtacmaxtitlan there is no name 
given by Bernal Diaz or Cortes which coincides with a name on the 
modem map, although the Socochima of the narrative is undoubtedly 
Xico Viejo, a few miles from the modem village of Xico. The ruins 
of Xico Viejo were recently visited by Dr. J. W. Fewkes, who says 
that *' the last half mile of the road is practically impassable for 
horses, and must be made on foot, justifying the statements of Gomara 
regarding the difficulties the horsemen of Cortes encountered in 
reaching the pueblo." (Twenty-fifth Annual Report, Bureau of Ameri- 
can Ethnology, 1903-4-) 

The Theuhixuacan mentioned by Gomara must be the Ixuacan of 
the modem map. 

The Spaniards passed to the south of the great mountain mass of 
the Cofre de Perote (13,403 ft.) between that mountain and the 



^16 THE MARCH FROM CEMPOALA TO TLAXCALÁ. 

snowcapped volcano of Orizaba (17,365 ft.) to the tableland of 
Tlaxcala. 

There is a considerable rise between Cempoala and Jalapa, which 
stands at an elevation of 4608 ft. 

I am unable to ascertain the height of the pass between Perote and 
Orizaba, but it probably exceeds 10,000 ft., followed by a descent of I 

about 3000 ft. to the plains of Tlaxcala and Puebla, which are 7000 ft. f 

to 8000 ft. above sea level. 

According to Bemal Diaz, the most difficult pass (Puerto de Nombre 
de Dios) was crossed before reaching the main divide. 

After the passage between the mountains the Spaniards came to the 
salt lakes, marshes, and inhospitable stretches of sand and volcanic 
ash which extend along the western slope of the Cofte de Peroie. 

It is impossible to locate the exact route between the mountain pass 
and Zocotlan, as no names are given and part of the country is uninha- 
bitable. Zocotlan itself was in all probability the Zautla of the modem 
map, but we are not on secure ground until the Spaniards reach 
Ixtacmaxtitlan, near the Tlaxcalan frontier. This frontier is still 
marked by the ruins of the wall built by the Tlaxcalans as a defence 
against their enemies, but the ruins are not marked on the Govern- 
ment map. However, the natural line of travel would be up stream 
from Ixtacmaxtitlan, and this would bring us to a place marked on 
the map Altlatlaya (no doubt AialayOy which means a wtUck tower)^ 
and I have taken this to be the spot where the Spaniards passed 
the wall, and have so marked it on the map which accompanies this 
volume. 

The march from Jalapa to Zocotlan must have been a most arduous 
one, and all the more difficult horn the fact that it was undertaken 
in the middle of the rainy season. There is a much easier, although 
somewhat longer, route passing round the north of Cofrc de Perote, 
but this was probably avoided by the Cempoalans as passing through 
too much of the enemies' country. 

Appended is an Itinerary, with dates compiled from the writings of 
Bemal Díaz^ Cortes,* Gomara^ and Andres de Tápia,* with the 
modem spelling of some of the. names taken from Padre Agustin 
Rivera.* 

August 
16. Leave Cempoala. 
17. 

18. Jalapa. 

19. Xico (modem map), Cocochima (B. D.X Sienchiraalen (C), 

Sienchimatl (G.), Xicochimilco (R.) 



»(B.D.) «(C.) »(G0 *(T.) *(R.) 



?REPARATÍONS Í^OR ÁN ADVANCE. 2Íj^ 

20. A high pass and Tejutla (B. D.), Puerto de Nombrc de Dios and 

Ceyconacan (C.)» Thcuhixuacan (G.), Ceycoccnacan, now 
Ishuacan de los Reyes (note to Cortes' letter in Rivadeneyra 
Edition), Ixuacan, modem map. 

21. Finish ascent of Mountain (B. D.), Despoblado— uninhabited 

country. 

22. Despoblado. Lakes of salt water and SaIitrales(T.),Salitrales 

(G.) 

23. Despoblado. Puerto de la Lena. March 2 leagues to 

24. ^ocotlan (B. D.), Zaclotan (G.), Xocotla (R.), valley called Cal- 

tanmi (C), Zacatami (G.). Spaniards called it Castil Blanco. 
Probably the Zautla of modern maps. 

25. Xocotlan. 

26. Xocotlan. 

27. Xocotlan. March 2 leagues up the valley to 

28. Iztacmastitan (C), Iztacmixtlitan (G.), Ixtamaxtitlan (R.), Ixta- 

camastitlan (modem map). 

Xalacingo of Bemal Diaz (evidently an error.) 

29. Ixtacmaxtitlan. 

30. Ixtacmaxtitlan. 

31. Cross the frontier into Tlaxcala at the great wall. March 

4 leagues, skirmish with force of Tlaxcalans and Otomies. 
September. 

2. First battle with the Tlaxcalan army under Xicotenga. 
5. Second battle. 
23. Spaniards enter the city of Tlaxcala. 



CHAPTER LXL 

How we settled to go to the City of Mexico and on the advice of the 
Cacique we went by way of Tlaxcala, and what happened to us in 
our warlike engagements and other matters. 

When our departure for Mexico had received full con- 
sideration, we sought advice as to the road we should take, 
and the chieftains of Cempoala were agreed that the best 
and most convenient road for us to take was through the 
province of Tlaxcala, for they [the Tlaxcalans] were their 
allies and mortal enemies of the Mexicans. 

Fqrty chieftains, all warriors, were already prepared to 
accompany us and were of great assistance to us on 
that journey ; and they provided us as well with two 



I 



2lé THE MARCH FROM CEMtOAÍA I 

hundred carriers to transport our artillery. We poor I 

soldiers had no need of help, for at that time we had 
nothing to carry except our arms, lances, muskets, cross- 
bows, shields and the like, with which we both marched and 
slept, and we were shod with hempen shoes, and as I have 
often said, were always prepared for a fight 

In the middle of August, 1519, we set out from Ccm- 
poala, keeping always in good formation, with scouts and 
some of the most active soldiers in advance. 

The first day we marched to a town named Jalapa, 
and thence to Socochima, a strong place with a difficult 
approach, and inside there were many vines of the grapes 
of the country^ on trellises. In both these towns, through 
our interpreters. Dona Marina and Jerónimo de Aguilar, 
all matters touching our holy religion were explained to , 

the people, and that we were the vassals of the Emperor 
Don Carlos, who had sent us to put an end to human 
sacrifices and robbery, and they were told other things 
which it was advantageous to state. As they were friends 
of the Cempoalans and did not pay tribute to Montezuma, 
we found them very well disposed towards us, and they 
provided us with food. A cross was erected in each town 
and its meaning was explained to them and they were told 
to hold it in great reverence. 1 

Beyond Socochima we crossed some high mountain 
ranges by a pass, and arrived at another town named 
Texutla, where we were also well received, for like the 
others they paid no tribute to Mexico. On leaving that j 

town we finished the ascent of the mountains and entered 
an uninhabited country, and it was very cold and hail and 
rain fell that night. There was a great scarcity of food and 
a wind came down from the snowy hills on one side of us 
which made us shiver with cold. As we had come from 



* These were probably grenadillas, the fruit of passion flowers. 



f? ÍÍOCOtLAN. ál$ 

the Island of Cuba and from Villa Rica, where the whole 
coast is very hot, and had entered a cold country and had 
nothing with which to cover ourselves, only our armour, 
we suffered from the frost, for we were not accustomed to a 
different temperature. 

Then we entered another pass where there were some 
hamlets and large temples with idols, which I have already 
said are called Cues^ and they had great piles of firewood for 
the service of the idols which were kept in those temples ; 
but still there was nothing to eat, and the cold was intense. 

We next entered into the land belonging to the town 
of Xocotlan, and we sent two Cempoala Indians to advise 
the Cacique how we were faring so that the people might 
receive us favourably. This town was subject to Mexico, 
so we always marched on the alert and in good order for 
we could see that we were already in a different sort of 
country, and when we saw the white gleam of the roof tops 
and the houses of the Caciques and the cues and numerous 
oratories, which were very lofty and covered with white 
plaster, they looked very pleasing like a town in our own 
Spain, so we called the place Castilblanco, for some 
Portuguese soldiers said that it reminded them of Castil- 
blanco in Portugal, and so it is called to this day. And 
when, through our messengers, they knew in this town that 
we were approaching, the Cacique and other chieftains 
came out to meet us close by their houses. The name of 
the Cacique was Olintecle, and he conducted us to some 
lodgings and gave us food, but there was very little of it 
and it was given with ill will. 

As soon as we had eaten, Cortes asked through our 
interpreters about their Lord Montezuma. The chief told 
us of his great strength in warriors, which he kept in all 
the provinces under his sway, without counting many 
other armies which were posted on the frontiers and in 
neighbouring provinces, and he [the chief] then spoke of the 



^2Ó OLINTECLE DESCRIBES KfEXlCÖ. 

great fortress of Mexico, and how the houses were built in 
the water, and how one can only pass from one house to 
another by means of bridges which they have made, or 
canoes ; and how all the houses have flat roofs, which, 
by raising breastworks when they are needed, can be 
turned into fortresses. That the city is entered by three 
causeways, each causeway having four or five openings in 
it through which the water can flow from one part to 
another, and each opening has a wooden bridge over it 
so that when any one of those bridges is raised no one 
can enter the city of Mexico. Then the chief told us of the 
great store of gold and silver, and chalchihuite stones and 
other riches which Montezuma, his lord, possessed, and he 
never ceased telling us how great a lord he was, so that 
Cortes and all of us marvelled at hearing him. The more 
he told us about the great fortress and bridges, of such stufi* 
are we Spanish soldiers made, the more we wanted to try 
our luck against them, although it seemed a hopeless 
enterprise, judging from what Olintecle explained and told 
us. In reality Mexico was much stronger and had better 
munitions and defences than anything he told us about, for 
it is one thing to have seen the place itself and its strength, 
and quite another thing to describe it as I do. He added 
that Montezuma was so great a prince that he placed 
anything he chose under his rule, and that he did not know 
if he would be pleased when he heard of our stay in that 
town, and that we had been given lodgings and food without 
his permission. 

Cortes replied through our interpreters : — " I would have 
you know that we have come from distant lands at the 
order of our lord and King, the Emperor Don Carlos, who 
has many and great princes as his vassals, and he sends us 
to command your great Prince Montezuma not to sacrifice 
or kill any more Indians, or to rob his vassals, or to seize 
any more lands, but to give his fealty to our lord the King. 



THE SPANIARDS MUST BE TEULES ! 221 

And now I say the same to you, Olintecle, and to all the 
other Caciques who are with you, desist from your sacri- 
fices, and no longer eat the flesh of your own relations, and 
cease to commit sodomy, and the other evil customs which 
you practice, for such is the will of our Lord God, whom 
we believe in and worship, the giver of life and death who 
will take us up to heaven." 

He told them many other things concerning our holy 
religion, to all of which things they made no reply. 

Cortes said to the soldiers who were present around him : 
" It seems to me, gentlemen, that there remains nothing for 
us to do but to set up a cross." But Padre Fray Bar- 
tolomé de Olmedo replied : — " It seems to me, sir, that the 
time has not yet come to leave crosses in the charge of 
these people for they are somewhat shameless and without 
fear, and as they are vassals of Montezuma they may burn 
the crosses or do some other evil thing, and what you have 
said to them is enough until they know something more 
of our holy religion." So the matter was settled and no 
cross was set up.* Let us leave this subject and that of the 
holy warnings which we gave them, and I will go on to say 
that we had with us a very large lurcher which belonged to 
Francisco de Lugo, which barked much of a night, and 
it seems that the Caciques of the town asked our friends 
whom we had brought from Cempoala, whether it was 
a tiger or a lion, or an animal with which to kill Indians, 
and they answered them : " They take it with them to kill 
anyone who annoys them." 

They also asked what we did with the artillery we 
had brought with us, and the Cempoalans replied that with 
some stones which we put inside them we could kill anyone 
we wished to kill, and that the horses ran like deer and 
they would catch anyone we told them to run after. Then 
Olintecle said to the other chiefs : " Surely they must be 
Teules ! " I have already said that Teule is the name they 



222 100,000 HUMAN SKULLS. 

give to their gods or idols and such like evil things. Our 
Indian friends replied : " So at last you have found it out ! 
Take care not to do anything to annoy them, for they will 
know it at once ; they even know one's thoughts. These 
Teules are those who captured the tax gatherers of }our 
great Montezuma and decreed that no more tribute should be 
paid throughout the sierras nor in our town of Cempoala ; 
and they are the same who turned our Teules out of their 
temples and replaced them with their own gods and who 
have conquered the people of Tabasco and Chanpoton, and 
they are so good that they have made friendship between 
us and the people of Cingapacinga. In addition to this 
you have seen how the great Montezuma, notwithstanding 
all his power, has sent them gold and cloth, and now they 
have come to your town and we see that you have given 
them nothing ; — run at once and bring them a present ! " 

It seems that we had brought good advocates with us, 
for the townspeople soon brought us four pendants, and 
three necklaces, and some lizards, all made of gold, but 
all the gold was of poor quah'ty ; and they brought us four 
Indian women who were good for grinding maize for 
bread, and one load of cloth. Cortes received these things 
with a cheerful good will and with many expressions of 
thanks. 

I remember that in the plaza where some of their 
oratories stood, there were piles of human skulls so regularly 
arranged that one could count them, and I estimated them 
at more than a hundred thousand. I repeat again that 
there were more than one hundred thousand of them. And 
in another part of the plaza there were so many piles of 
dead men's thigh bones that one could not count them ; 
there was also a large number of skulls strung between 
beams of wood, and three priests who had charge of these 
bones and skulls were guarding them. We had occasion 
to see many such things later on as we penetrated into the 



I 



DEPARTURE FOR TLAXCALA. 223 

country for the same custom was observed in all the towns, 
including those of Tlaxcala. 

After all that I have related had happened, we determined 
to set out on the road to Tlaxcala which our friends told us 
was very near, and that the boundary was close by where 
some boundary stones were placed to mark it. So we 
asked the Cacique Olintecle, which was the best and most 
level road to Mexico, and he replied the road which passed 
by the large town named Cholula, and the Cempoalans said 
to Cortes : — " Sir, do not go by Cholula for the people there 
are treacherous, and Montezuma always keeps a large 
garrison of warriors in that town ; " — and they advised us 
to go by way of Tlaxcala where the people were their 
friends and enemies of the Mexicans. So we agreed to 
take the advice of the Cempoalans, trusting that God 
would direct us. 

Cortes demanded of Olintecle twenty warrior chiefs to go 
with us, and he gave them at once. The next morning 
we set out for Tlaxcala and arrived at a little town 
belonging to the people of Xalacingo. From this place we 
sent two of the Cempoala chieftains as messengers, 
choosing two who had said much in praise of the Tlax- 
calans and had declared that they were their friends, and 
by them we sent a letter to the Tlaxcalans, although we 
knew that they could not read it ; and also a red fluffy 
Flemish hat, such as was then worn. 

What happened I will relate further on. 




224 BOOK IV.— THE WAR IN TLAXCALA. 

Introductory Note, 

Between the 31st August when the Spaniards crossed the Tlaxcalan 
frontier and fought a skirmish with some Otomi-Tlaxcalan troops, and 
the 23rd September when they entered the Capital of Tlaxcala, only 
two dates are mentioned by Bernal Diaz. He gives the 2nd September 
(Gomara says the ist September) as the date of the first great battle 
against the Tlaxcalan army under Xicotenca (Xicotencatl), and the 
name of the battlefield as Tehuacingo or Tehuacacingo, which cannot 
now be identified. 

After the battle the Spaniards took shelter in a village with a temple 
on a hill ; this hill is still pointed out by the natives as the site 
of Cortes' camp. Here the Spaniards formed a fortified camp, which 
continued to be their headquarters until the war was over, and they 
marched to the Capital of Tlaxcala. 

Bernal Diaz tells us that this camp was near Cunpanzingo, probably 
the Tzompantzingo of the modern maps. 

Bernal Diaz gives the 5lh September as the date of the second great 
battle, which was fought close by the camp. 

Although the accounts of the war in Tlaxcala given by Bernal Diaz 
and Cortes agree in the main points, they do not always give the 
events in the same order. It seems probable that Bernal Diaz places 
the night attack too early, and that it took place after Xicotenga had 
sent the spies to the Spanish camp. 

The boundaries of the so-called Republic of Tlaxcala appear to 
have been almost identical with those of the modem state of the same 
name. 

It has become a commonplace to describe the Tlaxcalans as hardy 
mountaineers and their form of Government as Republican, but such 
discrimination is misleading. Their country was no more mountainous 
than that of the Mexicans, and their form of Government was much 
the same as that of other Nahuá communities ; but as they had 
achieved no foreign conquests, they were compelled to be self-support- 
ing, and in that differed from the Mexicans, who were becoming a 
military caste, supported to a great extent by tribute from conquered 
tribes. Their country was fertile, and there must have been a large 
agricultural population, and all the men were inured to hardship and 
continual border warfare. 

According to Andres de Tápia, the existence of the Tlaxcalans as 
an independent nation was owing to the forbearance of the Mexicans 
themselves, for when he asked why they had not been conquered, 
Montezuma himself answered : ** We could easily do so, but then there 
would be nowhere for the young men to exercise themselves without 
going a long way off, and besides we always like to have people tg 
sacrifice to our Gods," 



BOOK IV. 



THE WAR IN TLAXCALA. 




CHAPTER LXII. 

How we decided to go by way of Tlaxcala, and how we sent messen- 
gers to induce the Tlaxcalans to agree to our passage through 
their country, how the messengers were taken prisoners, and what 
else happened. 

O we set out from Castilblanco and 
began our march with the scouts in 
advance, constantly on the alert, and 
the musketeers and crossbowmen in 
good order, as was necessary, and the 
horsemen in even closer order, and 
we all carrying our arms, as was 
always our custom. I will say nothing more about this, for 
it is no use wasting words over it, for we were always so 
much on the alert both by day and night that if an alarm 
had been given ten times over we should have been found 
ready every time. 

In such order we arrived at a little town of Xalacingo, 
where they gave us a golden necklace and some cloth and 
two Indian women, and from that town we sent two 
Cempoalan chieftains as messengers to Tlaxcala, with a 
letter, and a fluffy red Flemish hat, such as was then 
worn. We well knew that the Tlaxcalans could not read 

Q 



I 



226 MESSENGERS SEIZED BY THE TLAXCALANS 

the letter, but we thought that when they saw paper 
different from their own, they would understand that it 
contained a message ; and what we sent to tell them was 
that we were coming to their town, and hoped they would 
receive us well, as we came, not to do them harm, but to 
make them our friends. We did this because in this little 
town they assured us that the whole of TIaxcala was up in 
arms against us, for it appears that they had already 
received news of our approach and that we were accom- 
panied by many friends, both from Cempoala and Zocotlan, 
and other towns through which we had passed. As all 
these towns usually paid tribute to Montezuma, the Tlax- 
calans took it for granted that we were coming to attack 
TIaxcala, as their country had often been entered by craft 
and cunning and then laid waste, and they thought that 
this was another attempt to do so. So as soon as our two 
messengers arrived with the letter and the hat and began 
to deliver their message, they were seized as prisoners 
before their story was finished, and we waited all that day 
and the next for an answer and none arrived. 

Then Cortes addressed the chiefs of the town [where we 
had halted] and repeated all he was accustomed to tell the 
Indians about our holy religion and how we were vassals 
of our Lord and King who had sent us to these parts 
to put an end to human sacrifices, and the eating of human 
flesh, and the other evils which they were used to practise, 
and he told them many other things which we usually 
repeated in most of the towns we passed through, and after 
making them many promises of assistance, he asked for 
twenty Indian warriors of quality to accompany us on our 
march, and they were given us most willingly. 

After commending ourselves to God, with a happy 
confidence we set out on the following day for TIaxcala, 
and as we were marching along, we met our two messengers 
who had been taken prisoners. It seems that the Indians 



ESCAPE FROM THEIR CAPTORS. 227 

who guarded them were perplexed by the warlike prepara- 
tions and had been careless of their charge, and in fact, had 
let them out of prison. They arrived in such a state of 
terror at what they had seen and heard that they could 
hardly succeed in expressing themselves. 

According to their account, when they were prisoners 
the Tlaxcalans had threatened them, saying : " Now we are 
going to kill those whom you call Teules, and eat their 
flesh, and we will see whether they are as valiant as you 
announce ; and we shall eat your flesh too, you who come 
here with treasons and lies from that traitor Montezuma ! " 
and for all that the messengers could say, that we were 
against the Mexicans, and wished to be brothers to the 
Tlaxcalans, they could not persuade them of its truth. 

When Cortes and all of us heard those haughty words, 
and learned how they were prepared for war, although it 
gave us matter for serious thought, we all cried : — " If this 
is so, forward — and good luck to us!" We commended 
ourselves to God and marched on, the Alferez, Corral, 
unfurling our banner and carrying it before us, for the 
people of the little town where we had slept, as well as the 
Cempoalans assured us that the Tlaxcalans would come out 
to meet us and resist our entry into their country. 

Marching along as I have described, we discussed how 
the horsemen — in parties of three so as to help one another 
— should charge and return at a hand gallop with their 
lances held rather short, and when they broke through 
the hostile ranks should hold their lances before their 
faces and not stop to give thrusts, so that the Indians 
should not be able to seize hold of their lances ; and if 
by chance a lance were seized, the horseman should use 
all his strength and put spurs to his horse, so that helped 
by the leverage of the lance held beneath his arm, the 
furious rush of the horse might enable him to wrench it 
from the grasp of the Indian, or should drag him along with 

Q2 



228 THE TLAXCALAN FRONTIER IS CROSSED. 

it. It will be said to-day — ^what was the use of all this 
preparation when there were no hostile warriors in sight to 
attack us ? I answer this by repeating the words of 
Cortes : — " Gentlemen and comrades, seeing bow few of us 
there are, it behoves us to be always as well prepared and 
as much on the alert as though we saw the enemy 
approaching to attack us, and not only saw them approach- 
ing, but we should behave as though we were already 
fighting them ; and, as it often happens that they seize the 
lances with their hands, we have to be prepared for such an 
emergency as well as for anything else that may happen 
to a soldier. I have fully understood that, when fighting, 
there should be no need of directions, for I know, and am 
very willing to acknowledge it, that you behave much more 
courageously [without them]." 

In this way we marched about two leagues, when we 
came upon a fortress strongly built of stone and lime and 
some other cement, so strong that with iron pickaxes it 
was difficult to demolish it and it was constructed in such 
a way both for offence and defence, that it would be very 
difficult to capture. We halted to examine it, and Cortes 
asked the Indians from Zocotlan for what purpose the 
fortress had been built in such a way. They replied that, 
as war was always going on between the people of Tlaxcala 
and their lord, Montezuma, the Tlaxcalans had built this 
fort so strong the better to defend their towns, for we were 
already in their territory. We rested awhile and this, our 
entry into the land of Tlaxcala and the fortress, gave us 
plenty to think about. Cortes said : " Sirs, let us follow 
our banner which bears the sign of the holy cross, and 
through it we shall conquer!*' Then one and all we 
answered him : " May good fortune attend our advance, for 
in God lies the true strength." So we began our march 
again in the order I have already noted. 

We had not gone far when our scouts observed about 



SKIRMISH WITH TLAXCALAN TROOPS. áá^ 

thirty Indians who were spying. These carried two-handed 
swords, shields, lances and plumes of feathers. The swords 
are made with stones which cut worse than knives, so 
cleverly arranged, that one can neither break nor pull out 
the blades ; they are as long as broadswords ; and as I have 
already said, these spies wore devices and feather head- 
dresses, and when our scouts observed them they came 
back to give us notice. Cortes then ordered the same 
scouts to follow the spies, and to try and capture one of 
them without hurting them ; and then he sent five more 
mounted men as a support, in case there should be an 
ambush. Then all our army hastened on in good order 
and with quick step, for our Indian friends who were with 
us said that there was sure to be a large body of warriors 
waiting in ambush. 

When the thirty Indian spies saw the horsemen 
coming towards them, and beckoning to them with their 
hands, they would not wait for them to come up and 
capture one of them ; furthermore, they defended them- 
selves so well, that with their swords and lances they 
wounded some of the horses. 

When our men saw how fiercely the Indians fought 
and that their horses were wounded, they were obliged 
to kill five of the Indians. As soon as this happened, a 
squadron of Tlaxcalans,^ more than three thousand strong, 
which was lying in ambush, fell on them all of a sudden, 
with great fury and began to shower arrows on our horse- 
men who were now all together ; and they made a good 
fight with their arrows and fire-hardened darts, and did 
wonders with their two-handed swords. At this moment 
we came up with our artillery, muskets and crossbows, and 



» Probably Otomis from the Otomi town of Tecoac. Cortes says 
the chiefs of Tlaxcala sent messengers to say that the attack was made 
by communities (of Otomis?) without their knowledge. 



230 THE ENEMY RETREATS. 

little by little the Indians gave way, but they had kept 
their ranks and fought well for a considerable time. 

In this encounter they wounded four of our men and 
I think that one of them died of his wounds a few days 
later. 

As it was now late the Tlaxcalans beat a retreat and we 
did not pursue them ; they left about seventeen dead on 
the field, not counting many wounded. Where these 
skirmishes took place the ground was level and there were 
many houses and plantations of maize and magueys, which 
is the plant from which they make their wine. 

We slept near a stream, and with the grease from a 
fat Indian whom we had killed and cut open, we dressed 
our wounds, for we had no oil, and we supped very well on 
some dogs which the Indians breed [for food] for all 
the houses were abandoned and the provisions carried off, 
and they had even taken the dogs with them, but these 
came back to their homes in the night, and there we 
captured them, and they proved good enough food. 

All night we were on the alert with watches and patrols 
and scouts, and the horses bitted and saddled, in fear lest 
the Indians would attack us. 

I will leave off here and go on .to tell of the war they 
waged against us. 



CHAPTER LXIII. 



Of the war which was waged and the perilous battles which we fought 
against the Tlaxcalans, and what else happened. 

The next day, after commending ourselves to God, we set 
out with all our ranks in good order, the horsemen well 
instructed in the way they should charge through the 
enemy and return to us, and to see that the enemy should 
not be permitted to break our ranks and separate us one 



A GREAT BATTLE IS FOUGHT. 23! 

from the other. As we thus marched on, two armies of 
warriors approached to give us battle. They numbered 
six thousand men [and they came on us] with loud shouts 
and the din of drums and trumpets, as they shot their 
arrows and hurled their darts and acted like brave warriors. 
Cortes ordered us to halt, and sent forward the three 
prisoners whom we had captured the day before, to tell 
them not to make war on us as we wished to treat them as 
brothers. He also told one of our soldiers, named Diego 
de Godoy, who was a royal notary, to watch what took 
place so that he could bear witness if it should be necessary, 
so that at some future time we should not have to answer 
for the deaths and damages which were likely to take 
place, for we begged them to keep the peace. 

When the three prisoners whom we had sent forward 
began to speak to the Indians, it only increased their fur>^ 
and they made such an attack on us that we could not 
endure it. Then Cortes shouted : — " Santiago— and at 
them 1 " and we attacked them with such impetuosity 
that we killed and wounded many of them with our fire 
and among them three captains. They then began to 
retire towards some ravines, where over forty thousand 
warriors and their captain general, named Xicotenga, were 
lying in ambush, all wearing a red and white device for 
that was the badge and livery of Xicotenga 

As there was broken ground there we could make no use 
of the horses, but by careful manœuvring we got past it, 
but the passage was very perilous for they made play with 
their good archery and with their lances and broadswords 
did us much hurt, and the hail of stones from their slings 
was even more damaging. When we reached the level 
ground with our horsemen and artillery, we paid them back 
and slew many of them, but we did not dare to break our 
formation, for any soldier who left the ranks to follow some 
of the Indian captains and swordsmen was at once 



232 TLAXCALAN ARMY COMMANDED 

wounded and ran great danger. As the battle went on 
they surrounded us on all sides and we could do little 
or nothing. We dared not charge them, unless we charged 
all together, lest they should break up our formation ; and 
if we did charge them, as I have said, there were twenty 
squadrons ready to resist us, and our lives were in great 
danger for they were so numerous they could have blinded 
us with handfuls of earth, if God in his great mercy had 
not succoured us. 

While we found ourselves in this conflict among these 
great warriors and their fearful broad swords, we noticed 
that many of the strongest among them crowded together 
to lay hands on a horse. They set to work with a furious 
attack, laying hands on a good mare known to be very 
handy either for sport or for charging. The rider, Pedro 
de Moron, was a very good horseman, and as he charged 
with three other horsemen into the ranks of the enemy 
(they were ordered thus to charge together, so as to help 
one another) the Indians seized hold of his lance and he 
was not able to drs^ it away, and others gave him cuts 
with their broadswords and wounded him badly, and then 
they slashed at the mare, and cut her head off at the neck 
so that it hung by the skin, and she fell dead. If his 
mounted companions had not come at once to his rescue 
they would also have finished killing Pedro de Moron. 
We might possibly have helped him with our whole 
battalion, but I repeat again that we hardly dared to move 
from one place to another for fear that they would finally 
rout us, and we could not move one way or another ; i^ 
was all we could do to hold our own and prevent ourselves 
from being defeated. However, we rushed to the conflict 
around the mare and managed to save Moron from the 
hands of the enemy who were already dragging him off 
half dead and we cut the mare's girths so as not to leave 
the saddle behind. In that act of rescue, ten of our men 



BY XICOTENGA IS DEFEATED. 233 

were wounded and I remember that at the same time 
we killed four of the (Indian) captains, for we were 
advancing in close order and we did great execution with 
our swords. When this had happened, the enemy began 
to retire, carrying the mare with them, and they cut her in ^ 
pieces to exhibit in all the towns of Tlaxcala, and we 
learnt afterwards that they made an offering to their idols 
of the horseshoes, of the Flemish felt hat, and the two 
letters which we had sent them offering peace. 

The mare that was killed belonged to Juan Sedefto and 
it was because Sedeno had received three wounds the day 
before that he had given her to Moron who was a good 
horseman. I did not see Moron again for he died of his 
wounds two days later. 

To return to our battle : we were a full hour fighting in 
the fray, and our shots must have done the enemy much 
damage for they were so numerous and in such close 
formation, that each shot must have hit many of them. 
Horsemen, musketeers, crossbowmen, swordsmen, and those 
who used lance and shield, one and all, we fought like men 
to save our lives and to do our duty, for we were certainly 
in the greatest danger in which we had ever found our- 
selves. Later on they told us that we killed many Indians 
in this battle, and among them eight of their leading 
captains, sons of the old Caciques who lived in their 
principal town, and for this reason they drew off in good 
order. We did not attempt to follow them, and we were 
not sorry for it as we were so tired out we could hardly 
stand, and we stayed where we were in that little town. 
All the country round was thickly peopled, and they even 
have some houses underground like caves in which many 
of the Indians live. 

The place where this battle took place is called Tehua- 
cingo or Tehuacacingo and it was fought on the 2nd day 
of the month of September in the year 1519. When we 



234 THE SPANIARDS ENCAMP AND 

saw that victory was ours we gave thanks to God who had 
delivered us from such g^eat danger. 

From the field of battle we withdrew the whole force to 
some Cues which were strong and lofty like a fortress. We 
dressed the wounded men, who numbered fifteen, with the 
fat of the Indian I mentioned before. One man died of 
his wounds. We also doctored four or five horses which 
had received wounds, and we rested and supped very well 
that night, for we found a good supply of poultry and little 
dogs in the houses. And taking every precaution by 
posting spies, patrols and scouts, we rested until the next 
morning. 

In that battle we captured fifteen Indians, two of them 
chieftains. There was one peculiarity that the Tlaxcalans 
showed in this and all the other battles — that was to carry 
off any Indian as soon as he was wounded so that we 
should not be able to see their dead. 



CHAPTER LXIV. 



How we pitched our camp in some towns and hamlets called 
Teoa^ingo or Teva9Íngo and what we did there. 

As we felt weary after the battles we had fought, and many 
of the soldiers and horses were wounded and some died 
there, and it was necessary to repair the crossbows and 
replenish our stock of darts, we passed one day without 
doing anything worthy of mention. The following morning 
Cortes said that it would be as wqll for all the horsemen 
who were fit for work to scour the country, so that the 
Tlaxcalans should not think that we had given up fighting 
on account of the last battle, and that they should see that 
we meant to follow them up ; for on the previous day we 
had halted without sallying forth to look for them, and it 
was better for us to go out and attack them than for them 



THEIR HORSEMEN SCOUR THE COUNTRY. 235 

to come and attack us and thus find out our weakness. 
As the country was level and thickly populated, we set out 
with seven horsemen and a few musketeers and crossbow- 
men and about two hundred soldiers and our Indian allies, 
leaving the camp as well guarded as was possible. In the 
houses and towns through ^ich we passed, we captured 
about twenty Indian men and women without doing them 
any hurt, but our allies, who are a cruel people, burnt many 
of the houses and carried off much poultry and many dogs 
for food. When we returned to the camp which was not 
far off, Cortes set the prisoners free, after giving them 
something to eat, and Dofla Marina and Aguilar spoke 
kindly to them and gave them beads and told them not to 
be so mad any longer, but to make peace with us, as 
we wished to help them and treat them as brothers. Then 
we also released the two prisoners who were chieftains and 
they were given another letter, and were to tell the high 
Caciques who lived in the town — which was the capital of 
all the towns of the province — that we had not come to do 
them any harm or to annoy them, but to pass through 
, their country on our way to Mexico to speak to Montezuma. 
The two messengers went to Xicotenga's camp which was 
distant about two leagues among some towns and houses 
which I think they called Cuad9Ínpacingo, and when they 
gave him the letter and our message the reply that their 
captain Xicotenga gave them was, that we might go to his 
town where his father was living ; that there peace would 
be made by satiating themselves on our flesh, and honour 
paid to his gods with our hearts and blood, and that we 
should see his answer the very next day. 

When Cortes and all of us heard that haughty message, 
as we were already tired out with the battles and encounters 
we had passed through, we certainly did not think that 
things looked well. So Cortes flattered the messengers 
with soft words for it seemed that they had lost all fear, 



236 COMMUNICATION WITH XICOTENGA. 

and ordered them to be given some strings of beads, as he 
wished to send them back as messengers of peace. 

Cortes then learned from them more fully all about the 
Captain Xicotenga, and what forces he had with him. 
They told him that Xicotcnga had many more men with 
him now than he had when he attacked us before for 
he had five captains with him and each captain had 
brought ten thousand warriors. This was the way in 
which the count was made : Of the followers of Xicotenga 
who was blind from age — the father of the captain of the 
same name — ten thousand ; of the followers of another 
great chief named Mase Escasi,^ another ten thousand ; of 
the followers of another great chief named Chichimeca- 
tecle,* the same number ; of another great Cacique, lord of 
Topeyanco, named Tecapacaneca, another ten thousand ; 
and of another great chief named Guaxoban, another ten 
thousand ; so that there were in all fifty thousand. That 
their banner and standard had been brought out, which was 
a white bird with the appearance of an ostrich, with wings 
outstretched, as though it wished to fly, and that each 
company had its device and uniform, for each Cacique had 
a different one, as do our dukes and counts in our own 
Castile. 

All that I have here said we accepted as perfectly true, 
for certain Indians among those whom we had captured 
and who were released that day, related it very clearly, 
although they were not then believed. When we knew 
this, as we were but human and feared death, many of us, 
indeed the majority of us, confessed to the Padre de la 
Merced and to the priest, Juan Diaz, who were occupied 
all night in hearing our repentance and commending us to 
God and praying that He would pardon us and save us 

^ Maxixcatzin. 

^ Chichimecatecuhtli. 



THE SECOND GREAT BATTLE. 237 

from defeat. In this way the time passed until the next 
day, and the attack which they made on us I will now 
describe. 



CHAPTER LXV. 



Concerning the great battle which we fought against the forces of 
Tlaxcala, in which it pleased our Lord God to give us the victory, 
and what else happened. 

The next morning, the Sth of September, 15 19, we mus- 
tered the horses. There was not one of the wounded men 
who did not come forward to join the ranks and give 
as much help as he could. The crossbow men were warned 
to use the store of darts very cautiously, some of them 
loading while the others were shooting, and the musketeers 
were to act in the same way, and the men with sword and 
shield were instructed to aim their cuts and thrusts at the 
bowels [of their enemies] so that they would not dare to 
come as close to us as they did before. The artillery was 
all ready for action, and the horsemen had already been 
instructed to aid one another and to hold their lances short, 
and not to stop to spear anyone except in the face and 
eyes— charging and returning at a hand gallop and no 
soldier was on any account to break away from the ranks. 
With our banner unfurled, and four of our comrades 
guarding the standard-bearer. Corral, we set out from our 
camp. We had not marched half a quarter of a league 
before we began to see the fields crowded with warriors 
with great feather crests and distinguishing devices, and to 
hear the blare of horns and trumpets. 

Here would be a great opportunity to write down in 
proper order what happened to us in this most perilous 
and doubtful battle, for so many warriors surrounded us 
on all sides that [the situation] might be compared to a 



238 TLAXC ALANS UNDER XICOTENGA 

great plain, two leagues long and about the same breadth, 
and in its midst, four hundred men. Thus all the plain 
was swarming with warriors and we stood four hundred 
men in number, and of those many sick and wounded. 
And we knew for certain that this time our foe came with 
the determination to leave none of us alive excepting those 
who would be sacrificed to their idols. 

To go back to our battle : How they began to charge on 
us ! What a hail of stones sped from their slings ! As for 
their bowmen, the javelins lay like com on the threshing 
floor ; all of them barbed and fire- hardened, which would 
pierce any armour and would reach the vitals where there 
is no protection ; the men with swords and shields and 
other arms larger than swords, such as broadswords, and 
lances, how they pressed on us and with what valour and 
what mighty shouts and yells they charged upon us ! The 
steady bearing of our artillery, musketeers and crossbow- 
men, was indeed a help to us, and we did the enemy much 
damage, and those of them who came close to us with 
their swords and broadswords met with such sword play 
from us that they were forced back and they did not close 
in on us so often as in the last battle. The horsemen were 
so skilful and bore themselves so valiantly that, after God 
who protected us, they were our bulwark. However, I saw 
that our troops were in considerable confusion, so that 
neither the shouts of Cortes nor the other captains availed 
to make them close up their ranks, and so many Indians 
charged down on us that it was only by a miracle of 
sword play that we could make them give way so that our 
ranks could be reformed. One thing only saved our lives, 
and that was that the enemy were so numerous and so 
crowded one on another that the shots wrought havoc 
among them, and in addition to this they were not well 
commanded, for all the captains with their forces could 
not come into action, and from what we knew, since the 



AGAIN DEFEATED. 239 

last battle had been fought, there had been disputes and 
quarrels between the Captain Xicotenga and another cap- 
tain the son of Chichimecatecle, over what the one had said 
to the other, that he had not fought well in the previous 
battle ; to this the son of Chichimecatecle replied that he 
had fought better [than Xicotenga] and was ready to prove 
it by personal combat. So m this battle Chichimecatecle 
and his men would not help Xicotenga, and we knew for a 
certainty ' that he had also called on the company of 
Huexotzinco to abstain from fighting. Besides this, ever 
since the last battle they were afraid of the horses and the 
musketry, and the swords and crossbows, and our hard 
fighting ; above all was the mercy of God which gave us 
strength to endure. So Xicotenga was not obeyed by two 
of the commanders, and we were doing great damage to his 
men, for we were killing many of them, and this they tried 
to conceal ; for as they were so numerous, whenever one 
of their men was wounded, they immediately bound him up 
and carried him off on their shoulders, so that in this battle, 
as in the last, we never saw a dead man. 

The enemy were already losing heart, and knowing that 
the followers of the other two captains whom I have 
already named, would not come to their assistance, they 
began to give way. It seems that in that battle we had 
killed one very important captain, not to mention others, 
and the enemy began to retreat in good order, our horse- 
men following them at a hand gallop for a short distance, 
for they could not sit their horses for fatigue, and when we 
found ourselves free from that multitude of warriors, we 
gave thanks to God. 

In this engagement, one soldier was killed, and sixty 
were wounded, and all the horses were wounded as well. 
They gave me two wounds, one in the head with a stone, 
and one in the thigh with an arrow ; but this did not pre- 
vent me from fighting, and keeping watch, and helping our 



240 HARDSHIPS ENDURED BY THE SPANIARDS. 

soldiers, and all the soldiers who were wounded did the 
same ; for if the wounds were not very dangerous, we had 
to fight and keep guard, wounded as we were, for few 
of us remained unwounded. 

Then we returned to our camp, well contented, and 
giving thanks to God. We buried the dead in one of those 
houses which the Indians had built underground, so that 
the enemy should not see that we were mortals, but should 
believe that, as they said, we were Teules. We threw much 
earth over the top of the house, so that they should not 
smell the bodies, then we doctored all the wounded with 
the fat of the Indian, as I have related before. It was cold 
comfort to be even without salt or oil with which to cure 
the wounded. There was another want from which we 
suffered, and it was a severe one — and that was clothes with 
which to cover ourselves, for such a cold wind came from 
the snow mountains, that it made us shiver, for our lances 
and muskets and crossbows made a poor covering. That 
night we slept with more tranquillity than on the night 
before, when we had so much duty to do, with scouting, 
spies, watchmen and patrols. 

I will leave off here and relate what we did on the next 
day. In this battle we captured three Indian chieftains. 



CHAPTER LXVI. 



How next day we sent messeng^ers to the Caciques of Tlaxcala, begging 
them to make peace, and what they did about it 

After the battle which I have described was over, in 
which we had captured three Indian chieftains, our Captain 
Cortes sent them at once in company with the two others 
who were in our camp and who had already been sent as 
messengers, and ordered them to go to the Caciques of 
Tlaxcala and tell them that we begged them to make peace 



THE TLAXC ALANS CONSULT WIZARDS. 24 1 

and to grant us a passage through their country on our 
way to Mexico, as we had already sent to request them, 
and to say that if they did not now come to terms, we 
would slay all their people, but that as we were well 
disposed towards them and wished to treat them as 
brothers, we had no desire to annoy them, unless they 
gave us reason to do so; and he said many flattering 
things to them so as to make friends of them, and the 
messengers then set out eagerly for the capital of Tlaxcala 
and gave their message to all the Caciques already men- 
tioned by me, whom they found gathered in council with 
many other elders and priests. They were very sorrowful 
both over the want of success in the war and at the 
death of those captains, their sons and relations, who had 
fallen in battle. As they were not very willing to listen to 
the message, they decided to summon all the soothsayers, 
priests, and those others called Tacal naguas (who are 
like wizards and foretell fortunes), and they told them to 
find out from their witchcraft, charms, and lots what people 
we were, and if by giving us battle day and night without 
ceasing we could be conquered, and to say if we were 
Teules, (which, as I have already said many times, are evil 
beings, like devils,) as the people of Cempoala asserted, 
and to tell them what things we ate, and ordered them to 
look into all these matters with the greatest care. 

When the soothsayers and wizards and many priests 
had got together and made their prophecies and forecasts, 
and performed all the other rites according to their use, 
it seems that they said that by their divinations they 
had found out we were men of flesh and blood and ate 
poultry and dogs and bread and fruit when wc had 
them, and that we did not eat the flesh nor the hearts of 
the Indians whom we killed. It seems that our Indian 
friends whom we had brought from Cempoala had made 
them believe that we were Teules, and that we ate the 



242 NIGHT ATTACK REPULSED. 

hearts of Indians, and that the cannon shot forth lightningr, 
such as falls fronn heaven, and that the Lurcher, which was 
a sort of lion or tiger, and the horses, were used to catch 
Indians when we wanted to kill them, and much more 
nonsense of the same sort. 

The worst of all that the priests and wizards told the 
Caciques was, that it was not during the day, but only at 
night that we could be defeated, for as night fell, all our 
strength left us. Furthermore, their wizards told them 
that by day we were very valiant, and all this strength 
lasted throughout the day up to sunset, but that as soon as 
night came on we had no strength whatever. When the 
Caciques heard this, and they were quite convinced of it, 
they sent to tell their captain general Xicotenga that as 
soon as it was possible he should come and attack us in 
great force by night. On receiving this order Xicotenga 
assembled ten thousand of the bravest of his Indians and 
came to our camp, and from three sides they began alter- 
nately to shoot arrows and throw single pointed javelins 
from their spear throwers, and from the fourth side the 
swordsmen and those armed with macanas and broad- 
swords approached so suddenly, that they felt sure that 
they would carry some of us off to be sacrificed. Our Lord 
God provided otherwise, for secretly as they approached, 
they found us well on the alert, and as soon as our outposts 
and spies perceived the great noise of their movement, 
they ran at breakneck speed to give the alarm, and as we 
were all accustomed to sleep ready shod, with our arms on 
us and our horses bitted and saddled, and with all our arms 
ready for use, we defended ourselves with guns, crossbows 
and sword play so that they soon turned their backs. As 
the ground was level and there was a moon the horsemen 
followed them a little way, and in the morning we found 
lying on the plain about twenty of them dead and wounded. . 
So they went back with great loss and sorely repenting 



DILEMMA OF THE SPANIARDS. 243 

this night expedition, and I have heard it said, that as what 
the priests and wizards had advised did not turn out well 
they sacrificed two of them. 

That night, one of our Indian friends from Cempoala 
was killed and two of our soldiers were wounded and one 
horse, and we captured four of the enemy. When we 
found that we had escaped from that impetuous attack we 
gave thanks to God, and we buried our Cempoala friend 
and tended the wounded and the horse, and slept the rest 
of the night after taking every precaution to protect the 
camp as was our custom. 

When we awoke and saw how all of us were wounded, 
even with two or three wounds, and how weary we were 
and how others were sick and clothed in rags, and knew 
that Xicotenga was always after us, and already over forty- 
five of our soldiers had been killed in battle, or succumbed 
to disease and chills, and another dozen of them were ill, 
and our Captain Cortes himself was suffering from fever as 
well as the Padre de la Merced, and what with our labours 
and the weight of our arms which we always carried on 
our backs, and other hardships from chills and the want of 
salt, for we could never find any to eat, we began to wonder 
what would be the outcome of all this fighting, and what 
we should do and where we should go when it was 
finished. To march into Mexico we thought too arduous 
an undertaking because of its great armies, and we said to 
one another that if those Tlaxcalans, which our Cempoalan 
friends had led us to believe were peacefully disposed, could 
reduce us to these straits, what would happen when we 
found ourselves at war with the great forces of Montezuma? 
In addition to this we had heard nothing from the Spaniards 
whom we had left settled in Villa Rica, nor they of us. 
As there were among us very excellent gentlemen and 
soldiers, steady and valiant men of good counsel, Cortes 
never said or did anything [important] without first asking 

K 2 



244 CORTES ENCOURAGED BY HIS FOLLOWERS 

well considered advice, and acting in concert with us. 
Although the historian Gomara says Cortes did this and 
that, and came here and went there, and says many other 
things without reason, even if Cortes were made of iron, 
as Gomara in his history says he was, he could not be 
everywhere at once. Suffice it to say that he bore himself 
like a good commander. This I say, for after all the great 
mercies which our Lord granted us in all our doings, and 
in the late victories, and in everything else, it seems that 
God gave us soldiers grace and good counsel to advise 
Cortes how to do all things in the right way. 

Let us cease praising and cease speaking of past praises, 
for they do not add much to our history, and let me relate 
how one and all we put heart into Cortes, and told him that 
he must get well again and reckon upon us, and that 
as with the help of God we had escaped from such perilous 
battles, our Lord Jesus Christ must have preserved us for 
some good end ; that he [Cortes] should at once set our 
prisoners free and send them to the head Caciques already 
named by me, so as to bring them to peace, when all that 
had taken place would be pardoned, including the death of 
the mare. 

Let us leave this and say how Dofia Marina who, although 
a native woman, possessed such manly valour that, although 
she had heard every day how the Indians were going to kill 
us and eat our flesh with chili, and had seen us surrounded 
in the late battles, and knew that all of us were wounded 
and sick, yet never allowed us to see any sign of fear in her, 
only a courage passing that of woman. So Dona Marina 
and Jerónimo de Aguilar spoke to the messengers whom 
we were now sending and told them that they must come 
and make peace at once, and that if it was not concluded 
within two days we should go and kill them all and 
destroy their country and would come to seek them in 
their city, and with these brave words they were dispatched 



SENDS AN EMBASSY TO TLAXCALA. 245 

to the capital where Xicotenga the elder and Mase Escasi 
were [residing]. 

Let us leave this, and I will mention another thing that 
I have noticed, that the historian Gomara does not mention 
or make any record in his history of the fact that any of us 
were killed or wounded, or underwent any hardships, or 
suffered, but writes about it all as though we were going to 
a wedding, and it is thus that we find it recorded. Oh ! — 
how badly those men advised him when they told him to put 
such things in his history ! It has made all of us con- 
querors reflect upon what he wrote down, which not being 
true, he ought to have remembered, that as soon as we 
saw his history we must out with the truth ! 

Let us forget Gomara and say that our messengers went 
to the capital of Tlaxcala with our message, and I think 
that they carried a letter, for although we knew they 
could not understand it, yet they would look on it as 
an order, and with it was sent an arrow, and they found 
the two chief Caciques who were in conference with the. 
other chieftains, and what they answered I will go on 
to relate. 



CHAPTER LXVII. 



How we again sent messengers to the Caciques of Tlaxcala to bring 
them to peace, and what they did about it and decided. 

When the messengers whom we had sent to treat for 
peace arrived at Tlaxcala, they found the two principal 
Caciques in consultation, namely : Mase Escasi and Xico- 
tenga, the elder (the father of the Captain General 
Xicotenga, so often mentioned by me, who bore the same 
name). When they had heard the embassy, they were 
undecided and kept silence for a few moments, and it 
pleased God to guide their thoughts towards making peace 



246 THE (ÍACIQUÉS DELIBERATE. 

with US ; and they sent at once to summon all the other 
Caciques and captains who were in their towns, and those 
of a neighbouring province called Huexotzingo who were 
their friends and allies, and when all had come together 
to the town where they were, which was their capital, Mase 
Escasi and Xicotenga the elder, who were very wise men, 
made them a speech, as we afterwards learned, to the 
following effect, if not exactly in these words : 

" Brothers and friends, you have already seen how many 
times these Teules who are in this country expecting to be 
attacked, have sent us messengers asking us to make peace, 
saying that they come to assist us and adopt us as 
brothers ; and you have also seen how many times they 
have taken prisoners numbers of our vassals to whom they 
do no harm, and whom they quickly set free. You well 
know how we have three times attacked them with all our 
forces, both by day and by night, and have failed to 
conquer them, and that they have killed during the attacks 
we made on them, many of our people, and of our sons, 
relations and captains. Now, again, they have sent to ask 
us to make peace and the people of Cempoala whom they 
are bringing in their company say that they are the 
enemies of Montezuma and his Mexicans, and have ordered 
the towns of the Totonac sierra and those of Cempoala 
no longer to pay tribute to Montezuma. You will remember 
well enough that the Mexicans make war on us every year, 
and have done so for more than a hundred years, and you 
can readily see that we are hemmed in in our own lands, so 
that we do not dare to go outside even to seek for salt, 
so that we have none to eat, and we have no cotton, and 
bring in very little cotton cloth, and if some of our people 
go out or have gone out to seek for it, few of them return 
alive, for those traitorous Mexicans and their allies kill 
them or make slaves of them. Our wizards^ and sooth- 

^ Tacal naguas. 



XICOTENGA tttE VOUNGER kEFkACTORV. 247 

sayers and priests have told us what they think about the 
persons of these Teules, and that they are very valiant. It 
seems to me that we should seek to be friends with them, 
and in either case, whether they be men or Teules, that we 
should make them welcome, and that four of our chieftains 
should set out at once and take them plenty to eat, and 
should offer them friendship and peace, so that they should 
assist us' and defend us against our enemies, and let us 
bring them here to us, and give them women, so that 
we may have relationship with their offspring, for the 
ambassadors whom they have sent to treat for peace, tell 
us that they have some women with them." 

When they had listened to this discourse, all the Caciques 
and chiefs approved of it and said that it was a wise 
decision and that peace should be made at once, and that 
notice should be sent to the Captain Xicotenga and the 
other captains who were with him to return at once and 
not to attack again, and that they should be told that 
peace was already made, and messengers were immediately 
sent off to announce it. However, the Captain Xicotenga 
the younger would not listen to the four chiefs, and got 
very angry and used abusive language against them, and 
said he was not for peace, for he had already killed many 
of the Teules and a mare, and that he wished to attack us 
again by night and completely conquer us and slay us. 

When his father, Xicotenga the elder, and Mase Escasi 
and the other Caciques heard this reply they were very 
angry, and sent orders at once to the captains and to all 
the army that they should not join Xicotenga in attacking 
us again, and should not obey him in anything that he 
ordered unless it was in making peace. And even so he 
would not obey, and when they [the Caciques] saw the 
disobedience of their captain, they at once sent the same 
four chieftains whom they had sent before, to bring food 
to our camp and treat for peace in the name of all 



24^ feXPEbÍTION to 

Tlaxcala and Huexotzingo, but, from fear of Xicotenga the 
younger, the four old men did not come at that time, and 
as two or three things happened at the same moment, both 
in our camp and in the treating for peace, and as I must 
take in hand that which seems most convenient, I will 
cease speaking about the four Indian chieftains who were 
sent to treat for peace but did not dare to come for fear of 
Xicotenga, for at this time we went with Cortes to a town 
near our camp, and what happened I will tell in the next 
chapter. 



CHAPTER LXVIII. 



How we agreed to go to a town which was near to our camp, 
and what we did about it. 

As two days had passed without our doing anything 
worthy of record, we suggested to Cortes, and it was 
agreed to, that as there was a town about one league 
distant from our camp which had sent no reply when 
summoned to make peace, that we should march against 
it by night and take it by surprise, nt)t with intent to do 
it any harm, I mean not to kill or wound its inhabitants, 
or take them prisoners, but to carry off food and to frighten 
or talk them into making peace, according to the way 
they might act. 

This town was called Tzumpantzingo,^ and was the capital 
of many other small towns, and the township where our 
camp was placed, which was called Tecoad^unpan^ingo, 
was subject to it, and all round about it was thickly 
peopled. 

So one night, long before the approach of dawn, we rose 
early to go to that town with six of the best horsemen and 

• 
^ (y!unpanzingo in the original. 



tZUMPAtíTZlKGO 249 

the healthiest of the soldiers and ten crossbowmen and eight 
musketeers, with Cortes as our captain, although he was 
suffering from tertian fever, and we icft the camp as well 
guarded as was possible. We started on our march two 
hours before dawn came, and there was such a cold wind 
that morning blowing down from the snowy mountains 
that it made us shiver and shake, and the horses we had 
with us felt it keenly, for two of them were seized with 
colic and were trembling all over, which worried us a good 
deal as we feared that they would die. Cortes ordered 
their owners to take them back to the camp and try to 
cure them. 

As the town was not far off we arrived there before day- 
light, and when the natives perceived our approach, they 
fled from their houses shouting to one another to look out 
for the Teules who were coming to kill them, and the 
parents, in their panic, did not even wait to look after their 
children. When we saw what was happening, we halted- 
in a court until it was daylight, so as not to do the people 
any harm. As soon as the priests who were in the temples, 
the elders of the town and some of the old chieftains saw 
that we stood there without doing any harm, they came to 
Cortes and asked his pardon for not coming to our camp 
peacefully and bringing food when we had summoned 
them to do so, the reason being that the captain Xico- 
tenga, who was in the neighbourhood, had sent to them 
to say that they should not give us any, because his 
camp was supplied from that town and from many others, 
and he had with him as warriors the sons of the people of 
that town and from all the territory of Tlaxcala. Cortes 
told them through our interpreters, Dofia Marina and 
Aguilar, who always went with us on every expedition — 
even when it took place at night — to have no fear, but to 
go at once to the Caciques at the capital and tell them to 
come and make peace, for the war was disastrous to them, 



250 SUPPLIES Of FOOD SECURED. 

and he [Cortes] sent those [same] priests [as messengers], 
for, by the other messengers whom we had sent we had so 
far received no reply whatever. Concerning the circum- 
stance I have mentioned of the Caciques of Tlaxcala 
sending four chieftains to treat for peace, up to that time 
these had not arrived. 

These priests of the town quickly searched for more than 
forty cocks and hens and two women to grind tortillas, and 
brought them to us, and Cortes thanked them for it, and 
ordered them at once to send twenty Indians to our camp, 
and they came with the food without any fear whatever 
and stayed in the camp until the afternoon, and they were 
given little beads with which they returned well contented 
to their homes, and in all the small hamlets in our neigh- 
bourhood they spread word that we were good because we 
caused them no annoyance, and the priests and elders sent 
notice to the captain Xicotenga and told him how they had 
given us the food and the women, and he rated them 
severely, and they went at once to the capital to make 
it known to the o[d Caciques. As soon as they heard 
that we had not done the people any harm, although we 
might have killed many of them that night, and that we 
were sending them to treat for peace, they were greatly 
pleased, and ordered that we should be supplied every day 
with all that we needed ; and they again ordered the four 
Caciques, whom they had before charged with the mission 
of peace, to depart instantly for our camp, and carry with 
them all the food that had been prepared. We then 
returned to our camp with our supplies of food and the 
Indian women, all of us well contented. 

I must leave oflf here and relate what passed in the camp 
while we were gone away to that town. 



blSSÉKSÍÓN tN THE CAMP. 25 1 



CHAPTER LXIX. 



How when we returned with Cortes from Tzumpantzingo* with 
supplies, we found certain discussions being carried on in our 
camp, and what Cortes replied to them. 

When we returned from Tzumpantzingo,* as the town is 
called, with our supplies of food, very contented at leaving 
the place pacified, we found that in camp there had been 
meetings and discussions about the very great danger we 
were running day by day during this war, and on our arrival 
the discussion grew most lively. Those who talked most 
and were most persistent, were those who had left houses 
and assignments of Indians behind them in Cuba, and as 
many as seven of these men (whose names I will not 
mention so as to save their honour) met together and went 
to the hut where Cortes was lodging, and one of them who 
spoke for all, for he was very fluent of speech and knew 
very well what they had come to propose, said, as though 
he were giving advice to Cortes, that he should take heed 
of the condition we were in, wounded and thin and half- 
hearted, and the great hardships that we endured by 
night as sentinels and spies, or patrols and scouts, and 
both by day and night in fighting. According to the 
accounts he had made up, since leaving Cuba we had lost 
over fifty-five of our comrades, and knew nothing about 
those whom we had left as settlers at Villa Rica ; and 
although God had given us victory in the battles and 
skirmishes since we came from Cuba to this province and 
by His great pity had sustained us, we ought not to tempt 
Him so many times, and might it not turn out worse than 
Pedro Carbonero* ; that he [Cortes] had got us into an 

' Cinpanqingo in the original. ^ (^unpanzingo in the original. 

' Spoken proverbially of Pedro Carbonero, w^ho penetrated into the 
land of the Moors, but failed to return, and perished there with all his 
followers. 



J 



# 

252 THE DtSCONTfeNTEÍ) Al>DRESS CORTES. 

unexpected situation, and that some day or other we 
should be sacrificed to the idols, which please God would 
not happen ; but that it would be a good thing to return 
to our town and the fortress which we had built, and 
stay among the towns of our friends the Totonacs until 
we could build a ship which should be dispatched to Diego 
Velasquez and to other parts and islands to ask them to 
send us help and assistance ; and that now the ships 
which we sunk would have been useful to us, and we 
might have left at least two of them in case of necessity 
arising, but without consulting them about this, or about 
anything else, by the advice of those who did not know 
how to provide for changes of fortune, he [Cortes] had 
ordered them all to be sunk, and please God that he and 
those who had given him such advice would not repent 
of it ; that we were no longer able to support the burden 
much less the many overburdens [which we were carrying] 
and that we were going along worse than beasts of burden ; 
for when a beast has done its day's work its packsaddle 
is taken off and it is given food and rest ; but we went 
booted and loaded down with our arms both by day and 
night ; and they told Cortes besides that he could see in 
any history that neither the Romans nor Alexander, nor 
any other of the most famous captains whom the world 
had known, had dared to destroy their ships and with such 
a small force throw themselves against such a great popu- 
lation with so many warriors as he had done, and that it 
wt>uld be the cause of his own death and that of all his 
. followers ; that he should wish to preserve his life and the 
lives of us all, and that we should at once return to Villa 
Rica as the country there was at peace ; that they had not 
said all this before, as there had been no time to do so on 
account of the many warriors who were opposed to us 
every day, both in front and on our flanks ; and although 
they had not returned to the attack they believed that they 



CORTES REPLIES. 253 

would do SO, and since Xicotenga with his great power had 
not been to look for us during the last three days, that he 
must be collecting his forces and we ought not to await 
another battle like the last ; and they said more to the 
same effect. 

Cortes noticing that they spoke somewhat haughtily, 
considering that their words took the form of unasked 
advice, answered them very gently and said that he was 
aware of many of the things that they had mentioned, and 
that from what he had seen and believed, there was not in 
the whole world another [company of] Spaniards who were 
hardier, or who had fought with greater courage, or had 
endured such excessive hardships as we had, and that if we 
had not marched with arms continually on our backs, and 
kept watch, and gone on patrol, and suffered cold, and if we 
had not done all this we should already have perished, and 
that it was to save our lives that we had to endure those 
hardships and even greater ones, and he said : " Why, sirs, 
should we talk about deeds of valour when in truth our 
Lord is pleased to help us ? When I remember seeing us 
surrounded by so many companies of the enemy and 
watching the play of their broadswords so close to us, 
it even now terrifies me, especially when they killed the 
mare with a single sword cut ; we indeed seemed to be 
defeated and lost, and then I appreciated your great 
courage more than ever. As God then freed us from such 
great danger, so I have trust in Him that He will do the 
same in the future ; and I will say more — that in all such 
dangers you will find no slackness on my part when I 
share them with you." He had good reason to say so for in 
all the battles he was to be found in the front. ** I wish you, 
sirs, to bear in mind, that as our Lord has been pleased to 
help us, we have hope that so it may be in the future, 
for ever since we have penetrated into this country, in 
all the towns we have passed through, we have preached 



254 CORTÉS REPLIES. 

the holy doctrine as well as we were able, and have 
induced the Indians to destroy their idols. As we already 
see that neither Xicotenga nor his captains put in an 
appearance and that they are afraid to return, for we must 
have done them great damage in the late battles, and that 
they are not able to assemble their followers, as they have 
already been defeated three times"; for these reasons he 
had confidence in God and his advocate, San Pedro, who 
prays for us, that the war in this province is ended. " Now, 
as you have seen, the people of Cinpancingo are bringing 
food and have made peace and so have our neighbours 
here who have returned to live in their houses." As for 
the destruction of the ships, it was very well advised, and 
that if some of them were not consulted in the matter, as the 
other gentlemen were, it was because he [Cortes] resented 
what happened on the beach, which he did not now wish to 
call to mind ; that the opinion and advice which they now 
gave him was on a par with that which they gave on that 
occasion ; that they could see that there were many other 
gentlemen in the camp who strongly opposed what they 
were now asking and advising, and that it would be better 
to trust all matters to God and to follow them up in His 
holy service. " As to what you say, sirs, that the most 
renowned Roman captains have never done such great 
deeds as we have — ^you tell the truth. And from now 
onwards, God helping us, they will say in the histories that 
record these events far more than they may have said 
about those that happened before ; so, as I have already 
said, all our labours are devoted to the service of God and 
our great Emperor Don Carlos, and under his true justice 
and Christianity will be aided by the mercy of our Lord, 
and He will support us as we go from good to better. So, 
gentlemen, it is clearly no good to go back a single step, 
for if these people and those whom we leave behind in peace 
were to see us in retreat, the very stones would rise up 



CORTáS REPLIES. 255 

against us. As at the present time they take us for 
gods and idols, and so call us, they would then look on us 
as cowards and weaklings." 

" As for what you say about staying among the friendly 
Totonacs, our allies, if they should see us return without 
going to Mexico, they would rise against us, and the reason 
for this would be that, as we stopped them from paying 
tribute to Montezuma, he would send his Mexican forces 
against them to bring them again under tribute and make 
war on them and would order them to make war on us, and 
they, so as to escape destruction, for they greatly fear the 
Mexicans, would soon set to work ; so that where we 
expected to have friends we would find enemies. Then as 
soon as the great Montezuma learned that we had retreated, 
what would he say ? What would he think of our words, 
and of what we sent to tell him ? That it was all a 
joke or child's play. So, gentlemen, if one way is bad, the 
other way is worse, and it is better to stay where we are, 
where there is open ground thickly inhabited, and our camp 
is well supplied with food, sometimes poultry, at others 
dogs, and thank God there is no lack of food. And I wish 
we had salt —which is our greatest want at present, and 
clothes to protect us from the cold. As to what you say, 
sirs, that we have lost fifty-five soldiers, since we left the 
Island of Cuba, from wounds, starvation, cold, illness and 
hardship, and that we are now few in number and all sick 
and wounded, God gives us the strength of a host ; it is 
clearly a fact that wars use up men and horses, and that 
sometimes we feed well, but we did not come here to rest 
ourselves, but to fight when opportunity offered. There- 
fore, I pray you, sirs, have the goodness to act like 
gentlemen, as persons who are used to put courage into 
those you may see showing weakness, and from now on 
give up thinking of the Island of Cuba and what you left 
there, and try to do what you have hitherto always done— 



256 THE DISCUSSION ENDED. 

your duty — as good soldiers ; for after God, who is your 
aid and support, we must rely on our own strong arms." 

When Cortes had given this reply, those soldiers renewed 
their argument. They admitted that all that Cortes had 
told them had been well said, but that when we left the 
town where we had made a settlement, our intention was, 
and now still is, to go to Mexico, which has such a great 
reputation on account of the strength of the city and its 
great number of warriors. The people of Cempoala said 
that the Tlaxcalans were a peaceful people, and they had 
no such reputation as those of Mexico, yet we had been in 
great danger of losing our lives, and if they should attack 
us next day in another battle such as those we had gone 
through, we were too exhausted to hold our own. If they 
did not attack us again, still the journey to Mexico seemed 
to them a very terrible thing, and that he should reconsider 
what he was saying and commanding. 

Cortes answered half angrily that " It was better to die 
in a good cause, as the Psalms said, than to live dis- 
honoured 1 " And in addition to this which Cortes told 
them, the greater number of the soldiers, those who had 
elected Cortes captain, and had given him counsel about 
destroying the ships, cried out loudly that he should not 
trouble himself about gossip or listen to such tales, for 
with the help of God, by acting well together, we should 
be ready to do the right thing, and so all the talk ended. 

It is true enough that they grumbled at Cortes and 
cursed him, and even at us who had advised him, and at 
the Cempoalans who had brought us here, and said other 
unworthy things, but in such times they were overlooked. 
Finally all were fairly obedient, and I will leave off talking 
about this, and will relate how the aged Caciques again 
sent messengers from the capital of Tlaxcala to their 
captain general Xicotenga to say that without fail he 
should immediately visit us in peace and bring us food, 



A MESSAGE FROM XICOTENGA THE YOUNGER. 257 

for SO it was decreed by all the caciques and chieftains of 
their land and of Huexotzingo. They also sent to order 
the captains who were in Xicotenga's company, to refuse 
him all obedience if he did not go and make peace. This 
they sent to say three times, for they knew for certain 
that Xicotenga did not wish to obey them, but was de- 
termined once again to attack our camp by night, and 
for this purpose had assembled twenty thousand men, and 
being haughty and very stubborn, that now, as at other 
times, he would not obey. 

What he did in the matter I will tell further on. 



CHAPTER LXX. 



How the Captain Xicotenga had got ready twenty thousand picked 
warriors to attack our camp and what was done about it. 

When Mase Escasi and Xicotenga the elder, and the 
greater number of the Caciques of the capital of Tlaxcala 
sent four times to tell their captain not to attack us but to 
go and treat for peace, he was very close to our camp, and 
they sent to the other captains who were with him and 
told them not to follow him unless it was to accompany 
him when he went to see us peacefully. 

As Xicotenga was bad tempered and obstinate and 
proud, he decided to send forty Indians with food, poultry, 
bread and fruit and four miserable looking old Indian 
women, and much copal and many parrots' feathers. From 
their appearance we thought that the Indians who brought 
this present came with peaceful intentions, and when they 
reached our camp they fumigated Cortes with incense 
without doing him reverence, as was usually their custom. 
They said : " The Captain Xicotenga sends you all this 
so that you can eat. If you are savage Teules, as the 
Cempoalans say you are, and if you wish for a sacrifice, 

5 



2SS THE MESSENGERS FROM XICOTENGA 

take these four women and sacrifice them and you can eat 
their flesh and hearts, but as we do not know your manner 
of doing it, we have not sacrificed them now before you ; 
but if you are men, eat the poultry and the bread and 
fruit, and if you are tame Teules we have brought you 
copal (which I have already said is a sort of incense) and 
parrots' feathers ; make your sacrifice with that" 

Cortes answered through our interpreters that he had 
already sent to them to say that he desired peace and had 
not come to make war, but had come to entreat them and 
make clear to them on behalf of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
whom we believe in and worship, and of the Emperor Don 
Carlos, whose vassals we are, that they should not kill or 
sacrifice anyone as was their custom to do. That we were 
all men of bone and flesh just as they were, and not Teules 
but Christians, and that it was not our custom to kill any- 
one ; that had we wished to kill people, many opportunities 
of perpetrating cruelties had occurred during the frequent 
attacks they had made on us, both by day and night. 
That for the food they had brought he gave them thanks, 
and that they were not to be as foolish as they had been, 
but should now make peace. 

It seems that these Indians whom Xicotenga had sent 
with the food were spies sent to examine our huts and 
ranchos, and horses and artillery and [to report] how many 
of us there were in each hut, our comings and goings, and 
everything else that could be seen in the camp. They re- 
mained there that day and the following night, and some of 
them went with messages to Xicotenga and others arrived. 
Our friends whom we had brought with us from Cempoala 
looked on and bethought them that it was not a customary 
thing for our enemies to stay in the camp day and njght 
without any purpose, and it was clear to them that they 
were spies, and they were the more suspicious of them in 
that when we went on the expedition to the little town of 



PROVE TO BE SPIES. 259 

Tzumpantzingo, two old men of that town had told the 
Cempoalans that Xicotenga was all ready with a large 
number of warriors to attack our camp by night, in such 
a way that their approach would not be detected, and the 
Cempoalans at that time took it for a joke or bravado, and 
not believing it they had said nothing to Cortes ; but Dofia 
Marina heard of it at once and she repeated it to Cortes. 

So as to learn the truth, Cortes had two of the most 
honest looking of the Tlaxcalans taken apart from the 
others, and they confessed that they were spies ; then two 
others were taken and they also confessed that they were 
spies from Xicotenga and the reason why they had come. 
Cortes ordered them to be released, and we took two more 
of them and they confessed that they were neither more 
nor less than spies, but added that their Captain Xicotenga 
was awaiting their report to attack us that night with all 
his companies. When Cortes heard this he let it be known 
throughout the camp that we were to keep on the alert, 
believing that they would attack as had been arranged. 
Then he had seventeen of those spies captured and cut off 
the hands of some and the thumbs of others and sent 
them to the Captain Xicotenga to tell him that he had had 
them thus punished for daring to come in such a way, and 
to tell him that he might come when he chose by day or 
by night, for we should await him here two days, and that 
if he did not come within those two days that we would 
go and look for him in his camp, and that we would already 
have gone to attack them and kill them, were it not for 
the liking we had for them, and that now they should quit 
their foolishness and make peace. 

They say that it was at the very moment that those 
Indians set out with their hands and thumbs cut off, that 
Xicotenga wished to set out from his camp with all his 
forces to attack us by night as had been arranged ; but 
when he saw his spies returning in this manner he wondered 

S 2 



26o AN EMBASSY FROM TLAXCALA 

greatly and asked the reason of it, and they told him all 
that had happened, and from this time forward he lost his 
courage and pride, and in addition to this one of his 
commanders with whom he had wrangles and disagree- 
ments during the battles which had been fought, had left 
the camp with all his men. 
Let us get on with our story. 



CHAPTER LXXI. 

How the four chieftains who had been sent to treat for peace arrived 
in our camp and the speech they made, and what else happened. 

While we were in camp not knowing that they would 
come in peace, as we had so greatly desired, and were busy 
polishing our arms and making arrows, each one of us 
doing what was necessary to prepare for battle, at that 
moment one of our scouts came hurrying in to say that 
many Indian men and women with loads were coming 
along the high road from Tlaxcala, and without leaving the 
road were making for our camp, and that the other scout, his 
companion, who was on horseback, was watching to see 
which way they went ; meanwhile the other scout, his 
companion, who was on horseback, arrived and said that 
the people were close by and coming straight in our 
direction, and every now and then were making short 
stops. Cortes and all of us were delighted at this news, for 
we believed that it meant peace, as in fact it did, and 
Cortes ordered us to make no display of alarm and not to 
show any concern, but to stay hidden in our huts. Then, 
from out of all those people who came bearing loads, the 
four chieftains advanced who were charged to treat for 
peace, according to the instructions given by the old 
caciques. Making signs of peace by bowing the head, they 
came straight to the hut where Cortes was lodging and 



BEGGING FOR PEACE. 26 1 

placed one hand on the ground and kissed the earth and 
three times made obeisance and burnt copal, and said that 
all the Caciques of Tlaxcala and their allies and vassals, 
friends and confederates, were come to place themselves 
under the friendship and peace of Cortes and of his brethren 
the Teules who accompanied him. They asked his pardon 
for not having met us peacefully, and for the war which 
they had waged on us, for they had believed and held for 
certain that we were friends of Montezuma and his 
Mexicans, who have been their mortal enemies from times 
long past, for they saw that many of his vassals who paid 
him tribute had come in our company, and they believed 
that they were endeavouring to gain an entry into their 
country by guile and treachery, as was their custom to do, 
so as to rob them of their women and children ; and this 
was the reason why they did not believe the messengers 
whom we had sent to them. In addition to this they said 
that the Indians who had first gone forth to make war on 
us as we entered their country had "Slone it without their 
orders or advice, but by that of the Chuntales^ Estomies, 
who were wild people and very stupid, and that when they 
saw that we were so few in number, they thought to 
capture us and carry us off as prisoners to their lords 
and gain thanks for so doing ; that now they came to 
beg pardon for their audacity, and had brought us food, 
and that every day they would bring more and trusted 
that we would receive it with the friendly feeling with 
which it was sent ; that within two days the captain 
Xicotenga would come with other Caciques and give a 



* " Chontal in the Mexican language means barbarous," Relaciones 
de Yucatan^ vol. ii, p. 342 ; it here means the barbarous Otomis. The 
Otomis, according to Aztec tradition, were the earliest owners of the 
soil in Central Mexico ; their headquarters were in what are now 
known as the States of Queretaro and Guanajuato, but there were 
Otomi communities living among other tribes in many parts of 
Central Mexico. 



202 AN EMBASSY FROM TLAXCALA. 

further account of the sincere wish of all Tlaxcala to enjoy 
our friendship. 

As soon as they had finished their discourse they bowed 
their heads and placed their hands on the ground and 
kissed the earth. Then Cortes spoke to them through our 
interpreters very seriously, pretending he was angry, and 
said that there were reasons why we should not listen 
to them and should reject their friendship, for as soon as 
we had entered their country we sent to them offering 
peace and had told them that we wished to assist them 
against their enemies, the Mexicans, and they would not 
believe it and wished to kill our ambassadors ; and not 
content with that, they had attacked us three times both 
by day and by night, and had spied on us and held us 
under observation ; and in the attacks which they made on 
us we might have killed many of their vassals, but he 
would not, and he grieved for those who were killed ; but 
it was their own fault and he had made up his mind to go 
to the place where the old chiefs were living and to attack 
them ; but as they had now sought peace in the name 
of that province, he would receive them in the name of our 
lord the King and thank them for the food they had 
brought. He told them to go at once to their chieftains 
and tell them to come or send to treat for peace with fuller 
powers, and that if they did not come we would go to their 
town and attack them. 

He ordered them to be given some blue beads to be 
handed to their Caciques as a sign of peace, and he warned 
them that when they came to our camp it should be by 
day and not by night, lest we should kill them. 

Then those four messengers departed, and left in some 
Indian houses a little apart from our camp, the Indian 
women whom they had brought to make bread, some 
poultry, and all the necessaries for service, and twenty 
Indians to bring wood and water. From now on they 



SOME COMMENTS ON GOMARA'S HISTORY. 263 

brought us plenty to eat, and when we saw this and 
believed that peace was a reality, we gave great thanks to 
God for it. It had come in the nick of time, for we were 
already lean and worn out and discontented with the 
war, not knowing or being able to forecast what would 
be the end of it. 

In the past chapters the historian Gomara says that 
Cortes ascended some cliffs and saw the town of Tzum- 
pantzingo. I repeat that it was close by our camp and 
that the soldier must have been very blind who wishing to 
see it could not see it and see it very clearly. He also 
says that the soldiers wanted to mutiny and rebel, and he 
says other things which I do not care to write down, as it 
is a waste of words. I say that never in the world was a 
captain obeyed with more respect and punctuality, as will 
be seen further on. No such thought entered into the 
head of a single soldier from the time we marched inland, 
unless it was on the one occasion of the sand dunes. 

The words which were said in this last chapter were by 
way of advice and because it seemed to them that they 
were right and not for any other reason, for the men always 
followed him truly and loyally. Whoever sees Gomara's 
history will believe it to be true, as it is expressed with 
such eloquence, although it is quite the reverse of what 
really took place. 

I will leave off here and will go on to tell what took 
place later, about some messengers sent by the great 
Montezuma. 



204 AN EMBASSY FROM MONTEZUMA. 



CHAPTER LXXII. 

How ambassadors from Montezuma, the great lord of Mexico, came 
to our camp, and of the present which they brought. 

As our Lord God, through his great loving kindness, was 
pleased to give us victory in those battles in Tlaxcala, our 
fame spread throughout the surrounding country, and 
reached the ears of the great Montezuma in the great City 
of Mexico ; and if hitherto they took us for Teules, which 
is the same as their idols, from now on they held us in 
even greater respect as valiant warriors, and terror fell on 
the whole country at learning how, being so few in number 
and the Tlaxcalans in such great force, we had conquered 
them and that they had sued us for peace. So that now 
Montezuma, the great Prince of Mexico, powerful as he 
was, was in fear of our going to his city, and sent five 
chieftains, men of much importance, to our camp at 
Tlaxcala to bid us welcome, and say that he was rejoiced 
at our great victory against so many squadrons of warriors, 
and he sent a present, a matter of a thousand dollars worth 
of gold, in very rich jewelled ornaments, worked in various 
shapes, and twenty loads of fine cotton cloth, and he sent 
word that he wished to become the vassal of our great 
Emperor, and that he was pleased that we were already 
near his city, on account of the good will that he bore 
Cortes and all his brothers, the Teules, who were with 
him (for so they called us) and that he [Cortes] should 
decide how much tribute he wished for every year for our 
great Emperor, and that he [Montezuma] would give it in 
gold and silver, cloth and chalchihuites, provided we would 
not come to Mexico. This was not because he would not 
receive us with the greatest willingness, but because the 
land was rough and sterile, and he would regret to see us 
undergo such hardships which perchance he might not 



XICOTENGA VISITS CORTES. 265 

be able to alleviate as well as he could wish. Cortes 
answered by saying that he highly appreciated the good 
will shown us, and the present which had been sent, and 
the offer to pay tribute to his Majesty, and he begged the 
messengers not to depart until he went to the capital of 
Tlaxcala, as he would despatch them from that place, for 
they could then see how that war ended, and he did not 
wish to give them his reply at once, because he had pui^ed 
himself the day before with some camomiles such as are 
found in the Island of Cuba, and are very good for one 
who knows how to take them. I will leave this subject 
and tell what else happened in our camp. 



CHAPTER LXXIII. 



How Xicotenga, the Captain General of Tlaxcala, came to treat for 
peace, and what he said and what he settled with us. 

Cortes was talking to the ambassadors of Montezuma, as 
I have already said, and wanted to take some rest, for he 
was ill with fever and had purged himself the day before, 
when they came to tell him that the Captain Xicotenga 
was arriving with many other Caciques and Captains, all 
clothed in white and red cloaks, half of the cloak was white 
and the other half red, for this was the device and livery of 
Xicotenga, [who was approaching] in a very peaceful 
manner, and was bringing with* him in his company about 
fifty chieftains. 

When Xicotenga reached Cortés's quarters he paid him 
the greatest respect by his obeisance, and ordered much 
copal to be burned. Cortes, with the greatest show of 
affection, seated him by his side and Xicotenga said that he 
came on behalf of his father and of Mase Escasi and all the 
Caciques, and Commonwealth of Tlaxcala to pray Cortes 



266 xicotenga's speech. 

to admit them to our. friendship, and that he came to render 
obedience to our King and Lord, and to ask pardon for 
having taken up arms and made war upon us. That this 
had been done because they did not know who we were, 
and they had taken it for certain that we had come on 
behalf of their enemy Montezuma, and as it frequently 
happened that craft and cunning was used to gain entrance 
to their country so as to rob and pillage it, they had 
believed that this was now the case, and for that reason 
had endeavoured to defend themselves and their country, 
and were obliged to show fight He said that they were 
a very poor people who possessed neither gold, nor silver, 
nor precious stones, nor cotton cloth, nor even salt to eat, 
because Montezuma gave them no opportunity to go out 
and search for it, and that although their ancestors pos- 
sessed some gold and precious stones, they had been given 
to Montezuma on former occasions when, to save them- 
selves from destruction, they had made peace or a truce, 
and this had been in times long past ; so that if they had 
nothing to give now, we must pardon them for it, for 
poverty and not the want of good will was the cause of it. 
He made many complaints of Montezuma and his allies 
who were all hostile to them and made war on them, 
but they had defended themselves very well. Now they 
had thought to do the same against us, but they could not 
do it although they had gathered against us three times 
with all their warriors, and we must be invincible, and when 
they found this out about our persons they wished to 
become friends with us and the vassals of the great prince 
the Emperor Don Carlos, for they felt sure that in our 
company they and their women and children would be 
guarded and protected, and would not live in dread of the 
Mexican traitors, and he said many other words placing 
themselves and their city at our disposal. 

Xicotenga was tall, broad shouldered and well made; 



PEACE MADE WITH TLAXCALA. 267 

his face was long, pockmarked and coarse, he was about 
thirty-five years old and of a dignified deportment. 

Cortes thanked him very courteously, in a most flattering 
manner, and said that he would accept them as vassals of 
our King and Lord, and as our own friends. Then Xico- 
tenga begged us to come to his city, for all the Caciques, 
elders and priests were waiting to receive us with great 
rejoicing. Cortes replied that he would go there promptly, 
and would start at once, were it not for some negotiations 
which he was carrying on with the great Montezuma, and 
that he would come after he had despatched the mes- 
sengers. Then Cortes spoke somewhat more sharply and 
severely about the attacks they had made on us both by 
day and night, adding that as it could not now be mended 
he would pardon it. Let them see to it that the peace we 
now were granting them was an enduring one, without any 
change, for otherwise he would kill them and destroy their 
city and that he [Xicotenga] should not expect further 
talk about peace, but only of war. 

When Xicotenga and all the chieftains who had come 
with him heard these words they answered one and all, 
that the peace would be firm and true, and that to prove 
it they would all remain with us as hostages. 

There was further conversation between Cortes and 
Xicotenga and most of his chiefs, and they were given blue 
and green beads for Xicotenga's father, for himself, and for 
the other Caciques, and were told to report that Cortes 
would soon set out for their city. 

The Mexican Ambassadors were present during all these 
discussions and heard all the promises that were made, and 
the conclusion of peace weighed on them heavily, for they 
fully understood that it boded them no good. And when 
Xicotenga had taken his leave these Ambassadors of 
Montezuma half laughingly asked Cortes whether he be- 
lieved any of those promises which were made on behalf 



208 CORRESI*ONDENCE WITH ESCALANTE, 

of all TIaxcala, [alleging] that it was all a trick which de- 
served no credence, and the words were those of traitors and 
deceivers ; that their object was to attack and kill us as soon 
as they had us within their city in a place where they could 
do so in safety ; that we should bear in mind how often 
they had put forth all their strength to destroy us and had 
failed to do so, and had lost many killed and wounded, and 
that now they offered a sham peace so as to avenge 
themselves. Cortes answered them, with a brave face, that 
their alleged belief that such was the case did not trouble 
him, for even if it were true he would be glad of it so as to 
. punish them [the Tlaxcalans] by taking their lives, that it 
did not matter to him whether they attacked him by day 
or by night, in the city or in the open, he did not mind one 
way or the other, and it was for the purpose of seeing 
whether they were telling the truth that he was determined 
to go to their city. 

The Ambassadors seeing that he had made up his mind 
begged him to wait six days in our camp as they wished 
to send two of their companions with a message to their 
Lord Montezuma, and said that they would return with a 
reply within six days. To this Cortes agreed, on the one 
hand because, as I have said he was suffering from fever, 
and on the other because, although when the Ambassadors 
had made these statements he had appeared to attach no 
importance to them, he thought that there was a chance 
of their being true, and that until there was greater 
certainty of peace, they were of a nature requiring much 
consideration. 

As at the time that this peace was made the towns all 
along the road that we had traversed from our Villa Rica 
de Vera Cruz were allied to us and friendly, Cortes wrote 
to Juan de Escalante who, as I have said, remained in the 
town to finish building the fort, and had under his command 
the sixty old or sick soldiers who had been left behind. 



WHO WAS AT VILLA RICA. 269 

In these letters he told them of the great mercies which 
our Lord Jesus Christ had vouchsafed to us in the victories 
which we had gained in our battles and encounters since 
we had entered the province of Tlaxcala, which had now 
sued for peace with us, and asked that all of them would 
give thanks to God for it. He also told them to see to it 
that they always kept on good terms with our friends in 
the towns of the Totonacs, and he told him to send at once 
two jars of wine which had been left behind, buried in a 
certain marked place in his lodgings, and some sacred 
wafers for the Mass, which had been brought from the 
Island of Cuba, for those which we had brought on this 
expedition were already finished. 

These letters were most welcome, and Escalante wrote 
in reply to say what had happened in the town, and all 
that was asked for arrived very quickly. 

About this time we set up a tall and sumptuous cross 
in our camp, and Cortes ordered the Indians of Tzum- 
pantzingo and those who dwelt in the houses near our camp 
to whitewash it, and it was beautifully finished. 

I must cease writing about this and return to our new 
friends the Caciques of Tlaxcala, who when they saw that 
we did not go to their city, came themselves to our camp 
and brought poultry and tunas,^ which were then in season, 
each one brought some of the food which he had in his 
house and gave it to us with the greatest good will without 
asking anything in return, and they always begged Cortes 
to come with them soon to their city. As we had promised 
to wait six days for the return of the Mexicans, Cortes 
put off the Tlaxcalans with fair speeches. When the time 
expired, according to their word, six chieftains, men of 
great importance, arrived from Mexico, and brought a rich 
present from the great Montezuma consisting of valuable 

^ Tuna=the prickly pear, the fruit of the Nopal Cactus (Opuntia). 



270 ANOTHER PRESENT FROM MONTEZtJMA. 

gold jewels wrought in various shapes worth three thousand 
pesos in gold, and two hundred pieces of cloth, richly 
worked with feathers and other patterns. When they 
offered this present the Chieftains said to Cortes that 
their Lord Montezuma was delighted to hear of our 
success, but that he prayed him most earnestly on no 
account to go with the people of Tlaxcala to their town, 
nor to place any confidence in them, that they wished to 
get him there to rob him of his gold and cloth, for they 
were very poor, and did not possess a decent cotton cloak 
among them, and that the knowledge that Montezuma 
looked on us as friends, and was sending us gold and 
jewels and cloth, would still more induce the Tlaxcalans 
to rob us. 

Cortes received the present with delight, and said that 
he thanked them for it and would repay their Lord Monte- 
zuma with good works, and if he should perceive that the 
Tlaxcalans had that in mind against which Montezuma 
had sent them to warn him, they would pay for it by having 
all their lives taken, but he felt sure they would be guilty 
of no such villainy, and he still meant to go and see what 
they would do. 

While this discussion was proceeding, many other mes- 
sengers from Tlaxcala came to tell Cortes that all the old 
Caciques from the Capital and from the whole province 
had arrived at our ranchos and huts, in order to see Cortes 
and all of us, and to take us to their city. When Cortes 
heard this he begged the Mexican Ambassadors to wait 
for three days for the reply to their prince, as he had at 
present to deliberate and decide about the past hostilities 
and the peace which was now offered, and the Ambassadors 
said that they would wait. 

What the old Caciques said to Cortes I will now go on 
to relate. 



THE TLAXCALAN CACIQUES VISIT THE CAMP. 2/1 



CHAPTER LXXIV. 

How the old Caciques of Tlaxcala came to our Camp to beg Cortes 
and all of us to go with them at once to their city, and what 
happened about it. 

When the old Caciques from all Tlaxcala saw that we did 
not come to their city, they decided to come to us, some in 
litters, others in hammocks or carried on men's backs, and 
others on foot. These were the Caciques already men- 
tioned by me, named Mase Escasi, Xicotenga the elder, 
Guaxolocingo, Chichimecatecle, and Tecapaneca of Topey- 
anco.^ They arrived at our camp with a great company of 
chieftains, and with every sign of respect made three 
obeisances to Cortes and to all of us, and they burnt copal 
and touched the ground with their hands and kissed it, 
and Xicotenga the elder began to address Cortes in the 
following words : — 

" Malinche, Malinche,* we have sent many times to im- 
plore you to pardon us for having attacked you and to 
state our excuse, that we did it to defend ourselves from 
the hostility of Montezuma and his powerful forces, for we 
believed that you belonged to his party and were allied 
to him. If we had known what we now know, we should 
not only have gone out to receive you on the roads with 
supplies of food, but would even have had them swept for 
you, and we would even have gone to you to the sea where 
you keep your acales (which are the ships). Now that you 
have pardoned us, what I and all these Caciques have come 
to request is, that you will come at once with us to our 
City, where we will give you of all that we possess and 
will serve you with our persons and property. Look to it 

^ Padre Rivera gives the names of the four Caciques of Tlaxcala as 
Maxixcatzin,Xicotencatl,Tlehuexolot2Ín, and Citlalpopocatzin. {Anales 
Mexicanos^ p- 9^.) 

' Sometimes spelt Malinchi, sometimes Malinche. 



272 THE SPANIARDS MARCH TO TLAXCALA. 

Malinche that you do not decide otherwise or we will leave 
you at once, for we fear that perchance these Mexicans 
may have told you some of the falsehoods and lies that 
they are used to tell about us. Do not believe them nor 
listen to them, for they are false in everything, and we well 
know that it is on their account that you have not wished 
to come to our City/* 

Cortes answered them with cheerful mien and said, 
that it was well known, many years before we had come 
to these countries, what a good people they were and 
that it was on this account that he wondered at their 
attacking us. 

He said that the Mexicans who were there were [merely] 
awaiting a reply which he was sending to their Lord 
Montezuma. 

He thanked them heartily for what they said about our 
going at once to their city and for the food which they 
were continally sending and for their other civilities, and 
he would repay them by good deeds. He said that he 
would already have set out for their City if he had had 
anyone to carry the tepuzques (that is the cannon). As 
soon as they heard these words the Tlaxcalans were so 
pleased that one could see it in their faces, and they said 
" So this is the reason why you have delayed, and never 
mentioned it." And in less than half an hour they pro- 
vided over five hundred Indian carriers. 

The next day early in the morning we began our march 
along the road to the Capital of Tlaxcala keeping in good 
formation, the artillery as well as the horsemen, musketeers, 
crossbowmen and the rest, as it was always our custom 
to do. 

The messengers of Montezuma had already begged 
Cortes that they might go with us to see how affairs were 
settled at Tlaxcala and that he would despatch them from 
there, and that they should be quartered in his own 



THE NAME " MALINCHE." 2/3 

lodgings SO as not to receive any insults, for, as they said, 
they feared such from the Tlaxcalans. 

Before going on any further I wish to say that in all the 
towns we had passed through, and in others where they 
had heard of us, Cortes was called Malinche, and so I will 
call him Malinche from now henceforth in all the accounts 
of conversations which were held with any of the Indians, 
both in this province as well as in the City of Mexico. 
And I will not call him Cortes except in such places as it 
may be befitting. 

The reason why he was given this name is that Dona 
Marina, our interpreter, was always in his company, 
particularly when any Ambassadors arrived, and she 
spoke to them in the Mexican language. So that they 
gave Cortes the name of " Marina's Captain " and for 
short Malinche. 

This name was also attached to a certain Juan Perez de 
Artiaga^ (a settler at Puebla) because he always went with 
Dofla Marina and Jerónimo de Aguilar in order to learn 
the language, and for this reason they called him Juan 
Perez Malinche, as a title of distinction to Artiago, as we 
learnt about two years later on. 

I have liked to call some of these things to mind 
although there is no particular reason for it, excepting 
that it should be understood from now onwards that when 
Malinche is mentioned it means Cortes. 

I also wish to say that from the time we entered the 
territory of Tlaxcala until we set out for the city, twenty 



* Written in the original Artiaga or Artiago. In the letter from the 
army of Cortes to the Emperor (Icazbalceta's Coleccion de Docu- 
mentos para la Historia de Mexico) the name is signed as what 
appears to be Juan Perez de Aquitiano, but the word Aquitiano is so 
imperfectly written that Icazbalceta has printed it in a different 
type as doubtful. 

T 



274 THE SPANIARDS ENTER 

four days had elapsed, and we entered the city on the 
23rd September, 15 19. Now let us begin a fresh chapter 
and I will relate what happened to us there. 



CHAPTER LXXV. 



How we went to the City of Tlaxcala, and what the old Caciques did, 
about the present that they gave us, and how they brought their 
daughters and nieces, and what else happened. 

When the Caciques saw that our baggage was on the way 
to their city, they at once went on ahead to see that 
everything was ready for our reception and that our 
quarters were decked with garlands. 

When we arrived within a quarter of a league of the 
city, these same Caciques who had gone on ahead came 
out to receive us, and brought with them their sons and 
nephews and many of the leading inhabitants, each group 
of kindred and clan and party by itself. There were four 
parties in Tlaxcala, without counting that of Tecapaneca 
the lord of Topeyanco which made five. Their followers 
also came from all parts of the country wearing their 
different liveries, and although they were made of henequen, 
for there was no cotton to be obtained, they were very fine 
and beautifully embroidered and painted. Then came the 
priests from all parts of the province, and they were very 
numerous on account of the great oratories which they 
possess, which I have said are called Cues by the people, 
and are the places where they keep their idols and offer 
sacrifices. These priests carried braziers with live coals 
and incense and fumigated all of us, and some of them 
were clothed in very long garments like, fur cloaks and 
these were white, and they wore hoods over them which 
looked like those used by canons, as I have already said, 
and their hair was very long and tangled so that it could 



THE CITY OF TLAXCALA. 275 

not be parted unless it were cut, and it was clotted with 
blood which oozed from their ears, which on that day they 
had cut by way of sacrifice ; and they lowered their heads 
as a sign of humility when they saw us. 

The nails on their fingers were very long, and we heard 
it said that these priests were very pious and led good 
lives. 

Many of the chieftains came near to Cortes and accom- 
panied him, and when we entered the town there was not 
space in the streets and on the roofs for all the Indian men 
and women with happy faces who came out to see us. 
They brought us about twenty cones made of sweet 
scented native roses of various colours, and gave them to 
Cortes and t© the other soldiers whom they thought were 
Captains, especially to the horsemen. When we arrived at 
some fine courts where our quarters were, Xicotenga the 
elder and Mase Escasi took Cortes by the hand and led 
him into his lodging. For each one of us had been prepared 
a bed of matting such as they use, and sheets of henequen. 
Our friends whom we had brought from Cempoala and 
Zocatlan were lodged near to us, and Cortes asked that 
the messengers from the great Montezuma might also be 
given quarters close to his lodging. 

Although we could see clearly that we were in a land 
where they were well disposed towards us, and were quite 
at peace, we did not cease to be very much on the alert as 
was always our custom, and it appears that one captain 
whose duty it was to station the scouts and spies and 
watchmen said to Cortes, " It seems, sir, that the people 
are very peaceful and we do not need so many guards, nor 
to be so circumspect as we are accustomed to be." Cortes 
replied, " Well gentlemen, I can myself see all that you 
have brought to my notice, but it is a good custom always 
to be prepared, and although these may be very good 
people, we must not trust to their peacefulness, but must 

T 2 



J 



2^6 CORDIALITY OF THE TLAXCALANS. 

be as alert as we should be if they intended to make war 
on us and we saw them coming on to the attack, for many 
captains have been defeated through overconfidence and 
carelessness. It is especially necessarj^ for us always to be 
on the alert as we are so few in number, and whether 
it was done in good faith or bad, we must remember 
that the great Montezuma has sent to warn us." Let us 
stop talking about all the arrangements and order which 
we kept up in our watches and guards, and go on to say 
how Xicotenga the elder and Mase Escasi, who were the 
great Caciques, were greatly annoyed with Cortes and said 
to him through our interpreters, " Malinche, either you' 
take us for enemies or you show signs in what we see you 
doing that you have no confidence in us or in the peace 
which you promised to us and we promised to you, and we 
say this to you because we see that you keep watch, 
and travelled along the road all ready for action in the 
same way as when you attacked our squadrons, an4 we 
believe that you, Malinche, do this on account of the 
treasons and abominations which the Mexicans have told 
you in secret so as to turn you against us. See to it 
that you do not believe them, for you are established here, 
and we will give you all that you desire, even ourselves and 
our children, and we are ready to die for you, so you 
can demand as hostages whatever you may wish." 

Cortes and all of us marvelled at the courtesy and 
affection with which they spoke, and Cortes answered them 
that he had always believed them, and there was no need 
of hostages, it was enough to note their good will, and that 
as to being on the alert, it was always our custom, and they 
must not be offended at it. He thanked them for all they 
had offered us, and would repay them for their kindness in 
time to come. When this conversation was over, other 
chiefs arrived with a great supply of poultry and maize 
bread, and tunas and other fruits and vegetables which the 



t>RESENTAT10N OF GIFTS. 27; 

country produced, and supplied the camp very liberally, 
and during the twenty days that we stayed there there was 
always more than enough to eat 

We made our entry into the city, as I have said, on the 
23rd September, 15 19. I will leave off here, and go on 
to say what else happened. 



CHAPTER LXXVI. 



How Mass was said in the presence of many of the Caciques, and 
about a present which the old Caciques brought us. 

Early next day Cortes ordered an Altar to be put up and 
Mass to be said, for now we had both the wine and the 
sacred wafers. 

It was the priest Juan Diaz who said the Mass, for the 
Padre de la Merced was ill with fever and very feeble. 
There were present Mase Escasi and Xicotenga the elder 
and other Caciques. When Mass was over Cortes entered 
his lodging with some of us soldiers who usually accom- 
panied him, and the two old Caciques, and Xicotenga said 
to him that they wished to bring him a present, and Cortes 
showed much affection to them, and said that they should 
bring it whenever they wished, so some mats were at 
once spread out and covered with a cloth, and they brought 
six or seven trifles of gold, and some stones of small value, 
and some loads of henequen cloth ; it was all very poor 
and not even worth twenty dollars and when it had been 
presented, those Caciques said, laughing, "Malinche, we 
know well enough that as what we have to give is so small 
you will not receive it with good grace. We have already 
sent to tell you that we are poor and that we own neither 
gold nor riches, and the reason of it is that these traitorous 
and evil Mexicans and Montezuma, who is now their Lord, 
have taken all that we once possessed, when we asked them 



278 THE TLAXCALAN CACIQUES OFFER 

for peace or a truce, to prevent their making war on us, so 
do not consider the small value of the gift, but accept 
it with a good grace as the gift of friends and servants 
which we will be to you." Then they brought, separately, 
a large supply of food. 

Cortes accepted it most cheerfully, and said to them that 
he valued it more as coming from their hands with the 
good will with which it was oflFered, than he would a house 
full of grains of gold brought by others, and it was in this 
spirit that he accepted it, and he displayed much afTection 
towards them. 

It appears that it had been arranged among all the 
Caciques to give us from among their daughters and 
nieces the most beautiful of the maidens who were ready 
for marriage, and Xicotenga the elder said " Malinche, so 
that you may know more clearly our good will towards 
ycLU and our desire to content you in everything, we wish 
to give you our daughters, to be your wives, so that you 
may have children by them, for we wish to consider you as 
brothers as you are so good and valiant. I have a very 
beautiful daughter who has not been married, and I wish 
to give her to you," so also Mase Escasi and all the other 
Caciques said that they would bring their daughters, and 
that we should accept them as wives, and they made many 
other speeches and promises. Throughout the day Mase 
Escasi and Xicotenga the elder never left Cortes* im- 
mediate neighbourhood. As Xicotenga the elder was 
blind from old age, he felt Cortes all over his head and 
face and beard and over all his body. 

Cortes replied to them that, as to the gift of the 
women, he and all of us were very grateful and would 
repay them with good deeds as time went on. The Padre 
de la Merced was present and Cortes said to him " Senor 
Padre, it seems to me that this would be a good time to 
make an attempt to induce these Caciques to give up their 



THEIR DAUGHTERS TO THE SPANIARDS. 279 

Idols and their sacrifices, for they will do anything we tell 
them to do on account of the great fear they have of the 
Mexicans." The friar replied, " Sir, that is true, but let us 
leave the matter until they bring their daughters and then 
there will be material to work upon, and your honour can 
say that you do not wish to accept them until they give up 
sacrifices — if that succeeds, good, if not we shall do our 
duty." 

So thus the matter rested until next day, and what was 
done I will go on to relate. 



CHAPTER LXXVII. 

How they brought their daughters to present to Cortes and to all of 
us, and what was done about it. 

The next day the same old Caciques came and brought 
with them five beautiful Indian maidens, and for Indians 
they were very good looking and well adorned, and each 
of the Indian maidens brought another Indian girl as her 
servant, and all were the daughters of Caciques, and 
Xicotenga said to Cortes, " Malinche, this is my daughter 
who has never been married and is a maiden, take her for 
your own," and he gave her to him by the hand, " and let 
the others be given to the captains." Cortes expressed his 
thanks, and with every appearance of gratification said 
that he accepted them and took them as our own, but 
that for the present they should remain in the care of their 
parents. The Chiefs asked him why he would not take 
them now, and Cortes replied that he wished first to do 
the will of God our Lord, whom we believed in and wor- 
shipped, and that for which our Lord the King had sent us, 
which was to induce them to do away with their Idols, and 
no longer to kill and sacrifice human beings, and the other 
infamies they were wont to practise, and to lead them to 



28o CORTES EXPLAINS CHRISTIANITY. 

believe in that which we believed, that is in one true God, 
and he told them much more touching our holy faith, and 
in truth he expressed it very well, for Dona Marina and 
Aguilar, our interpreters, were already so expert at it that 
they explained it very clearly. He showed the Caciques 
an image of our Lady, with her precious Infant in her 
arms, and explained to them how that image was in the 
likeness of our Lady, who is called Santa Maria, who 
dwells in the high heavens and is the mother of our Lord, 
who is that Child Jesus whom she holds in her arms, 
whom she conceived by the grace of the Holy Spirit, being 
a virgin before His birth, and remaining a Virgin during 
His birth, and after His birth, and how that Great Lady 
prays for us to her precious Son who is our God and Lord, 
and he told them many other things which it was fitting to 
say about our holy faith. He also told them that if they 
wished to be our brothers and to have true friendship with 
us, so that we should willingly accept their daughters and 
take them, as they said, for our wives, that they should at 
once give up their evil Idols and believe in and worship 
our Lord God, who is He in whom we believe and whom 
we worship, and they would see how well things would go 
with them, for in addition to having good health and good 
seasons, other things would prosper with them, and when 
they died their souls would go to Heaven to enjoy glory 
everlasting ; but that if they went on making sacrifices as 
they were accustomed to do to their Idols, which were 
devils, they would be led to Hell where they would burn 
for ever in live flames. And as in other discourses he had 
already said much about the giving up of their Idols, he 
said nothing more now and what they replied to it all is 
as follows : — 

*' Malinche, we have already understood from you before 
now, and we thoroughly believe that this God of yours and 
this great Lady are very good, but look you, you have only 



THE TLAXCALAN REPLY. 28 1 

just come to our homes, as time goes on we shall under- 
stand your beliefs much more clearly, and see what they 
are, and will do what is right. But how can you ask us to 
give up our Teules which for many years our ancestors 
have held to be gods and have made sacrifices to them and 
have worshipped them ? Even if we, who are old men, 
might wish to do it to please you, what would our priests 
say, and all our neighbours, and the youths and children 
throughout the province? They would rise against us, 
especially as the priests have already consulted the greatest 
of our Teules, and he told them not to forget the sacrifice 
of men and all the rites they were used to practise, other- 
wise the gods would destroy the whole province with 
famine, pestilence and war." Thus they spoke and gave 
as their answer that we should not trouble to talk to them 
on that subject again for they were not going to leave off 
making sacrifices even if they were killed for it. 

When we heard that reply which they gave so honestly 
and without fear, the Padre de la Merced, who was a wise 
man, and a theologian, said, ** Sir, do not attempt to press 
them further on this subject, for it is not just to make them 
Christians by force, and I would not wish that you should 
do what we did in Cempoala, that is, destroy their Idols, 
until they have some knowledge of our Holy Faith. 
What good is it to take away now their Idols from one 
oratory or cue, if they carry them at once to another. It 
would be better that they should gradually feel the weight 
of our admonitions which are good and holy, so that 
later on they may realize the good advice which we are 
giving them." Furthermore three gentlemen, namely, Juan 
Velasquez de Leon and Francisco de Lugo, spoke to Cortes 
and said " The Padre is right in what he says, you have 
fulfilled your duty with what you have done, and do not 
touch again on this matter when speaking to these 
Caciques," and so the subject dropped. What we induced 



282 TLAXCALAN DAMSELS ARE ALLOTTED 

the Caciques to do, by entreaty, was at once to clear out 
one of the cues, which was close by and had been recently 
built, and after removing the Idols, to clean it and white- 
wash it so that we could place a cross in it and the image 
of Our Lady, and this they promptly did. Then Mass 
was said there and the Cacicas were baptized. The 
daughter of the blind Xicotenga was given the name of 
Dona Luisa, and Cortes took her by the hand and gave 
her to Pedro de Alvarado, and said to Xicotenga that he 
to whom he gave her was his brother and his Captain, and 
that he should be pleased at it as she would be well treated 
by him, and Xicotenga was contented that it should be so. 
The daughter or niece of Mase Escasi was named Dona 
Elvira and she was very beautiful and it seems to me that 
she was given to Juan Velasquez de Leon. The others 
were given baptismal names, always with the title of 
nobility (dona), and Cortes gave them to Gonzalo de 
Sandoval, and Cristobal de Olid and Alonzo de Avila. 
When this had been done Cortes told them the reason why 
he put up two crosses, and that it was because their Idols 
were afraid of them, and that wherever we were encamped 
or wherever we slept they were placed in the roads ; and 
at all this they were quite content. 

Before I go on any further I wish to say about the 
Cacica the daughter of Xicotenga, who was named Doha 
Luisa and was given to Pedro de Alvarado, that when 
they gave her to him all the greater part of Tlascala paid 
reverence to her, and gave her presents, and looked on her 
as their mistress, and Pedro de Alvarado who was then a 
bachelor, had a son by her named Don Pedro, and a 
daughter named Dona Leonor who is now the wife of 
Don Francisco de la Cueva, a nobleman, and a cousin 
of the Duke of Alberquerque, who had by her four or five 
sons, very good gentlemen, and that lady Dona Leonor, 
is so very excellent a lady, as might be expected, being 



TO THE SPANISH CAPTAINS. 283 

the daughter of such a father, who was a commendador of 
[The Order of] Santiago, Adelantado and Governor of 
Guatemala, and the same who went to Peru with a great 
fleet, and through his relation to Xicotenga was a great 
Lord of Tlaxcala. 

I must leave these stories and return to Cortes who 
questioned those Caciques and informed himself more 
completely about the affairs of Mexico. What they said 
about it is what I shall go on to relate. 



CHAPTER LXXVIII. 



How Cortes questioned Mase Escasi and Xicotenga about things in 
Mexico, and what account they gave of them. 

Cortes then took those Caciques aside and questioned 
them very fully about Mexican affairs. Xicotenga, as he 
was the best informed and a great chieftain, took the lead 
in talking, and from time to time he was helped by Mase 
Escasi who was also a great chief. 

He said that Montezuma had such great strength in 
warriors that when he wished to capture a great city or 
make a raid on a province, he could place a hundred and 
fifty thousand men in the field, and this they knew well 
from the experience of the wars and hostilities they had 
had with them for more than a hundred years past. 

Cortes asked them how it was that with so many warriors 
as they said came down on them they had never been 
entirely conquered. They answered that although the 
Mexicans sometimes defeated them and killed them, 
and carried off" many of their vassals for sacrifice, many 
of the enemy were also left dead on the field and 
others were made prisoners, and that they never could 
come so secretly that they did not get some warning, and 
that when they knew of their approach they mustered all 



284 THE TLAXCALAN CACIQtJES 

their forces and with the help of the people of Huexotzingo 
they defended themselves and made counter attacks. That 
as all the provinces which had been raided by Montezuma 
and placed under his rule were ill disposed towards the 
Mexicans, and that as their inhabitants were carried off by 
force to the wars, they did not fight with good will ; indeed, 
it was from these very men that they received warnings, 
and for this reason they had defended their country to the 
best of their ability. 

The place from which the most continuous trouble came 
to them was a very great city a day's march distant, which 
is called Cholula, whose inhabitants are most treacherous. 
It was there that Montezuma secretly mustered his com- 
panies and, as it was near by, they made their raids by 
night. Moreover, Mase Escasi said that Montezuma kept 
garrisons of many warriors stationed in all the provinces 
in addition to the great force he could bring from the city, 
and that all the provinces paid tribute of gold and silver, 
feathers, stones, cloth and cotton, and Indian men and 
women for sacrifice and others for servants, that he 
[Montezuma] was such a great prince that he possessed 
everything he could desire, that the houses where he dwelt 
were full of riches and [precious] stones and chalchihuites 
which he had robbed and taken by force from those who 
would not give them willingly, and that all the wealth of 
the country was in his hands. 

Then they told us about the great staflF of servants in 
his house, and the story would never cease were I to 
attempt to describe it all here, and of the many women 
he possessed, and how he married off some of them ; in 
fact they gave us an account of everything. 

Then they spoke of the great fortifications of the city, 
and what the lake was like, and the depth of water, and 
about the causeways that gave access to the city, and the 
wooden bridges in each causeway, and how one can go in 



GIVE A DESCRIPTION OF MEXICO. 285 

and out [by water] through the opening that there is in 
each bridge, and how when the bridges are raised one can 
be cut off between bridge and bridge and not be able to 
reach the city. How the greater part of the city was built 
in the lake, and that one could not pass from house to 
house except by draw-bridges and canoes which they had 
ready. That all the houses were flat-roofed and all the 
roofs were provided with parapets so that they could fight 
from them. 

They also told us about the way the city was provided 
with fresh water from a spring called Chapultepec distant 
about half a league fronj the city, and how the water enters 
by an aqueduct and reaches a place whence they can carry 
it in canoes to sell it in the streets. Then they told us 
about the arms that were used, such as two pronged 
javelins which they hurl with throwing sticks,* and will 
go through any sort of armour, and that there are many 
good archers, and others with lances with flint edges which 
have a fathom of cutting edge, so cleverly made that they 
cut better than knives, and they have shields, and cotton 
armour, and there are many slingers who sling rounded 
stones, and others with very good and long lances and 
stone edged two handed swords. 

They brought us pictures of the battles they had fought 
with the Mexicans painted on large henequen cloths, 
showing their manner of fighting. 

As our captain and all of us had already heard about all 
that these Caciques were telling us, we changed the subject, 
and started them on another more profound, which was, 
how was it that they came to inhabit that land, and from 
what direction had they come ? and how was it that they 
differed so much from and were so hostile to the Mexicans, 
seeing that their countries were so close to one another. 

* Atlatls, or spear throwers. 



286 THE BONES OF GIANTS ! 

They said that their ancestors had told them, that in 
times past there had lived among them men and women of 
giant size with huge bones, and because they were very 
bad people of evil manners that they had fought with 
them and killed them, and those of them who remained 
died off. So that we could see how huge and tall these 
people had been they brought us a leg bone of one of 
them which was very thick and the height of a man of 
ordinary stature, and that was the bone from the hip to 
the knee. I measured myself against it and it was as tall 
as I am although I am of fair size. They brought other 
pieces of bones like the first, but they were already eaten 
away and destroyed by the soil. We were all amazed at 
seeing those bones and felt sure that there must have been 
giants in this country, and our Captain Cortes said to us 
that it would be well to send that great bone to Castille 
so that His Majesty might see it, so we sent it with the 
first of our agents who went there. 

These Caciques also told us that they had learnt from 
their forefathers that one of their Idols, to which they paid 
the greatest devotion, had told them that men would come 
from distant lands in the direction of the rising sun to 
subjugate them and govern them, and that if we were those 
men, they were rejoiced at it, as we were so good and 
brave, and that when they made peace with us they 
had borne in mind what their Idols had said, and for 
this reason they had given us their daughters so as to 
obtain relations who would defend them against the 
Mexicans. 

When they had finished their discourse we were all 
astounded and said, can they possibly have spoken the 
truth ? Then our Captain Cortes replied to them and said 
that certainly we came from the direction of the sunrise, 
and that our Lord the King had sent us for this very 
purpose that we should become as brothers to them ; for 









T "*, t < I 



series II. Vol. XXIII. 







Facsimile {reduced) of Title-page of 

HERRERA. DECADE IV. 
Showing Portraits of PEDRO DE ALVARADO, DiEGO DE ORDAS, the Volcano 

of Popocatepetl, etc. 

Re?rodnccd and printed for the Hakluyt Society by Donald Macbúih, fHOt. 
Plate 12. To fact page 2tt> 



ORDÁS ASCENDS POPOCATEPETL. 287 

he had heard of them, and that he prayed God to give us 
grace, so that by our hands and our intercession they would 
be saved, and we all said Amen. , 

The gentlemen who read this will be weary of hearing 
the discussions and conversations between us and the 
Tlaxcalans and the Tlaxcalans and us, so I would wish to 
finish them, but I feel bound to dwell on one other thing 
which they discussed with us, and that is the volcano near 
Huexotzingo which at the time we were in Tlaxcala 
was throwing out much fire, much more than usual. Our 
Captain Cortes and all of us were greatly astonished as 
we had never seen such a thing before. One of our 
Captains named Diego de Ordás was very anxious to go 
and see what sort of a thing it was, and asked leave of the 
general to ascend the mountain, and leave was given,^ and 
he even expressly ordered him to do it. He took with him 
two of our soldiers and certain Indian chiefs from Huexot- 
zingo, and the chiefs that he took with him frightened him 
by saying that when one was half way up Popocatepetl, 
for so the volcano is called, one could not endure the 
shaking of the ground and the flames and stones and ashes 
which were thrown out of the mountain, and that they 
would not dare to ascend further than where stood the 
cues of the Idols which are called the Teules of Popo- 
catepetl. Nevertheless Diego de Ordás and his two 
companions went on up until they reached the summit, 
and the Indians who had accompanied them remained 
below and did not dare to make the ascent. It appears 
from what Ordás and the two soldiers said afterwards, that, 
as they ascended, the volcano began to throw out great 
tongues of flame, and half burnt stones of little weight 
and a great quantity of ashes, and that the whole of the 

» This account of the ascent of Popocatepetl appears to be given in 
the wrong place by Bernal Diaz : it probably took place when the 
Spaniards left Cholula. See Cortes' Second Letter. 



288 ORDAS ascends POPOCATEPETL. 

mountain range where the volcano stands was shaken, and 
that they stopped still without taking a step in advance for 
more than an hour, when they thought that the outburst 
had passed and not so much smoke and ashes were bein^ 
thrown out ; then they climbed up to the mouth which was 
very wide and round, and opened to the width of a quarter 
of a league. From this summit could be seen the great 
city of Mexico, and the whole of the lake, and all the 
towns which were built in it. This volcano is distant 
twelve or thirteen leagues from Mexico. 

Ordás was delighted and astonished at the sight of 
Mexico and its cities and after having had a good look at 
the view he returned to Tlaxcala with his companions, and 
the Indians of Huexotzingo and of Tlaxcala looked on 
it as a deed of great daring. When he told his story to 
Captain Cortes and all of us, we were greatly astonished 
at it, for at that time we had not seen nor heard of such 
things as we have to-day, when we know all about it, and 
many Spaniards and even some Franciscan friars have 
made the ascent to the crater. 

When Diego de Ordás went to Castille he asked the 
King for it [the mountain] as his [coat of] arms and his 
nephew who lives at Puebla, now bears them. 

Since we have been settled in this land we have never 
known the volcano to throw out so much fire or make such 
a noise as it did when we first arrived, and it has even 
remained some years without throwing out any fire, up to 
the year 1539 when it threw up great flames and stones 
and ashes. 

Let us cease telling about the volcano, for now that we 
know what sort of a thing it is, and have seen other i 

volcanoes such as those of Nicaragua and Guatemala, one 1 

might have been silent about those of Huexotzingo, and ' 

left them out of the story. 

I must tell how in this town of Tlaxcala we found 

I 
I 



PRISONERS ATTEND IN CAGES. 289 

wooden houses furnished with gratings, full of Indian men 
and women imprisoned in them, being fed up until they 
were fat enough to be sacrificed and eaten. These prisons 
we broke open and destroyed, and set free the prisoners 
who were in them, and these poor Indians did not dare to 
go in any direction, only to stay there with us and thus 
escape with their lives. From now on, in all the towns 
that we entered, the first thing our Captain ordered us to 
do was to break open these prisons and set free the 
prisoners. 

These prisons are common throughout the land and 
when Cortes and all of us saw such great cruelty, he 
showed that he was very angry with the Caciques of 
Tlaxcala, and quarrelled with them very angrily about it, 
and they promised that from that time forth they would 
not kill and eat any more Indians in that way. I said 
[to myself] of what benefit were all those promises, for as 
soon as we turned our heads they would commit the same 
cruelties. Let us leave this subject, and I will relate how 
we arranged to go to Mexico. 



CHAPTER LXXIX. 



How our Captain Hernando Cortes decided that all of us Captains 
and soldiers should go to Mexico, and what happened about it. 

When our Captain remembered that we had already been 
resting in Tlaxcala for seventeen days, and that we had 
heard so much said about the great wealth of Montezuma 
and his flourishing city, he arranged to take counsel with 
all those among our captains and soldiers whom he could 
depend on as wishing to advance, and it was decided that 
our departure should take place without delay, but there 
was a good deal of dissent expressed in camp about this 

U 



290 CORTES DECIDES TO ADVANCE 

decision, for some soldiers said that it was a very rash 
thing to go and enter into such a strong city, as we were 
so few in number, and they spoke of the very great strength 
of Montezuma. Our Captain Cortes replied that there 
was now no other course open to us, for we had constantly 
asserted and proclaimed that we were going to see Monte- 
zuma, so that other counsels were useless. 

His opponents seeing with what determination Cortes 
expressed himself, and knowing that many of us soldiers 
were ready to help him by crying: "Forward and good luck 
to us," dropped all further opposition. The men opposed 
[to Cortes] in this discussion were those who owned pro- 
perty in Cuba. I and other poor soldiers had always 
dedicated our souls to God who created them, and our 
bodies to wounds and hardships, and even to death in the 
service of Our Lord God and of His Majesty. 

When Xicotenga and Mase Escaci, the lords of Tlaxcala, 
saw that we were determined to go to Mexico, their spirits 
were weighed down, and they were constantly with Cortes 
advising him not to enter on such an undertaking, and not 
to trust Montezuma neither in great things nor in small, 
nor any other Mexican, and not to put faith in the great 
show of reverence he had made, nor in his words, however 
humble and courteous they might be, nor even in all the 
presents that had been sent to him, nor in any of his 
promises, for all was the work of traitors, who would turn 
on him and take back in an hour all that they had given, 
and that he must be on his guard against them both by 
day and by night, for they felt sure that when we were 
most off our guard they would attack us. They advised 
us when we fought with them [the Mexicans] to leave none 
alive that we were able to kill, neither the youths, so that 
they should never be able to carry arms, nor the old, lest 
they should give counsel ; and they gave us much other 
advice. 



BY WAV OF CHOLULA. 29 1 

Our captain said to them that he thanked the Caciques 
for their good counsel, and he showed them much affection, 
and made them many promises, and he gave as presents to 
JCicotenga the elder, and to Mase Escasi and most of the 
other Caciques a great part of the fine cloth which Monte- 
zuma had presented, and told them that it would be a 
good thing to make peace between them and the Mexicans, 
so that they should become friends and they could then 
obtain salt and cotton and other merchandise. Xicotenga 
replied that peace was useless, and that enmity was deeply 
rooted in their hearts, for such were the Mexicans that, 
under cover of peace, they would only be guilty of greater 
treachery, for they never told the truth in anything that 
they promised, and that he was not to trouble about saying 
more on the subject, and that they could only again im- 
plore us to take care not to fall into the hands of such bad 
people. 

We went on to talk about the road which we should take 
to reach Mexico, for the ambassadors from Montezuma, 
who remained with us and were to be our guides, said that 
the most level and the best road was by the city of Cholula, 
where the people were vassals of Montezuma and there we 
should receive proper attention. To all of us this appeared 
to be good advice, that we should go by that city. When 
however the Caciques of Tlaxcala heard that we wished to 
go by a road which the Mexicans were choosing for us, 
they became very sorrowful, and begged us in any case to 
go by Huexotzingo, where the people were their relations 
and our friends, and not by way of Cholula, for in Cholula 
Montezuma always kept his double dealings concealed. 

For all that they talked and advised us not to enter into 
that city, our Captain, (in accordance with our counsel 
which had been well talked over,) still determined to go by 
Cholula, on the one hand, because all agreed that it was a 
large town, and well furnished with towers, and fine and 

U 2 



292 MESSENGERS SENT TO CHOLULA. 

tall cues, and situated on a beautiful plain— and indeed at 
that time it looked from a distance like our city of Valla- 
dolid in Old Castile, — and on the other hand, because it 
was almost surrounded by other considerable towns and 
could provide ample supplies, and our friends of Tlaxcala 
were near at hand. We intended to stay there until we 
could decide how to get to Mexico without having to fight 
for it, for the great power of the Mexicans was a thing to be 
feared, and unless God our Lord, by His Divine mercy 
which always helped us and gave us strength, should first 
of all so provide, we could not enter Mexico in any 
other manner. 

After much discussion it was settled that we should take 
the road by Cholula, and Cortes at once sent messengers 
to ask the people of Cholula how it happened that being 
so near to us they had not come to visit us, and pay that 
respect which was due to us as the messengers of so great 
a prince as the King who had sent us to the country to tell 
them of their salvation. He then requested all the Caciques 
and priests of that city to come and see us and give their 
fealty to our Lord and King, and if they did not come he 
would look upon them as ill disposed towards us. While 
he was giving this' message and saying other things about 
which it seemed right that they should be informed, some- 
one came to tell Cortes that the great Montezuma had sent 
four Ambassadors with presents of gold, (for so far as we 
have seen they never send a message without a present of 
gold and cloth, as it is looked on as an affront to send a 
message without sending a present with it,) and what these 
messengers said I will go on to relate. 



ARRIVAL OF MONTEZUMA^S AMBASSADORS. 293 



CHAPTER LXXX. 

How the great Montezuma sent four Chieftains of great importance 
with a present of gold and cloth, and what they said to our 
Captain. 

While Cortes was talking to us all and to the Caciques of 
Tlaxcala about our departure and about warfare, they came 
to tell him that four Ambassadors, all four chieftains who 
were bringing presents, had arrived in the town. 

Cortes ordered them to be called, and when they came 
before him they paid the greatest reverence to him and to 
all of us soldiers who were there with him, and presented 
their gift of rich jewels of gold of many sorts of workman- 
ship, well worth two thousand dollars, and ten loads of 
cloth beautifully embroidered with feathers. 

Cortes received them most graciously, and the Am- 
bassadors said, on behalf of their Lord Montezuma, that 
he greatly wondered that we should stay so many days 
among a people who were so poor and so ill bred, who 
were so wicked, and such traitors and thieves that they 
were not fit even to be slaves, and that when either by day 
or by night we were most off our guard they would kill us 
in order to rob us. That he begged us to come at once 
to his city, and he would give us of all that he possessed, 
although it would not be as much as we deserved or he 
would like to give, and that although all the supplies had 
to be carried into the city, he would provide for us as well 
as he was able. 

Montezuma did this so as to get us out of Tlaxcala, 
for he knew of the friendship we had made, which I 
have recorded in the chapter which treats of that subject, 
and how, to perfect it, they [the Tlaxcalans] had given 
their daughters to Malinche, and the Mexicans fully 
understood that our confederation could bring no good 



294 ANOTHER EMBASSY 

to them. It was for this reason that they primed us with 
gold and presents, so as to induce us to go to their 
country or at least to get us out of Tlaxcala. 

I must add regarding the ambassadors, that the people 
of Tlaxcala knew them well, and told our Captain that all 
of them were lords over towns and vassals, and men whom 
Montezuma employed to conduct affairs of the greatest 
importance. 

Cortes thanked the messengers with many caressing 
expressions and signs of affection, and gave as his answer 
that he would go very soon to see their Lord Montezuma, 
and he begged them to remain a few days with us. 

At that time Cortes decided that two of our Captains, 
men especially chosen, should go and see and speak to the 
great Montezuma, and see the great city of Mexico and 
its great armies and fortresses, and Pedro de Alvarado and 
Bcrnaldino Vásquez de Tápia had already set out on the 
journey, accompanied by some of the ambassadors of the 
great Montezuma who were used to being with us, and the 
four ambassadors who had brought the present remained 
with us as hostages. As at that time Cortes had sent those 
gentlemen trusting to good luck, we dissuaded him from 
it, saying that as he was sending them to Mexico merely 
to see the city^ and its strength, we did not think it well 
advised, and that he should send and tell them not to pro- 
ceed any further, so he wrote to them telling them to 
return at once. Besides this Bernaldino Vásquez de Tápia 
had already fallen ill of fever on the r )ad, and as soon as 
they saw the letters they returned. 

The ambassadors with whom they were travelling gave 
an account of their doings to Montezuma, and he asked 
them what sort of faces and general appearance had these 
two Teules who were coming to Mexico, and whether they 

^ See note at end of chapter. 



FROM MONTEZUMA. 295 

were Captains, and it seems that they replied that Pedro 
de Alvarado was of very perfect grace both in face and 
person, that he looked like the Sun, and that he was a 
Captain, and in addition to this they brought with them a 
picture of him with his face "^ery naturally portrayed, and 
from that time forth they gave him the name of Tonatio, 
which means the Sun or the child of the Sun, and so they 
called him ever after. Of Bernaldino Vásquez de Tápia, 
they said that he was a robust man, and of a very pleasant 
disposition, and that he also was a captain, and Montezuma 
was much disappointed that they had turned back again. 
Those ambassadors had reason for the description given 
to the Lord Montezuma both as to features and general 
appearance, for Pedro de Alvarado was very well made 
and active, and of good features and bearing, and both in 
appearance and in speech and in everything else he was so 
pleasing that he seemed always to be smiling. Bernaldino 
Vásquez de Tápia was somewhat sturdy, but he had a 
good presence ; when they returned to our camp, we joked 
with them and told them that it was not a very successful 
mission that Cortes had sent them on. Let us leave this 
subject, for it does not bear much on our story, and I will tell 
about the messengers whom Cortes sent to Cholula and 
the reply that they brought 

Note. — In the original MS. the following passage is scratched out : 
•*To see the great city of Mexico and its great army and fortresses, 
and it seems to me that they were Pedro de Alvarado and Bernaldino 
Vásquez de Tápia, a^d four of the ambassadors who brought the 
present remained as hostages, and the others went with them. As at 
that time I was very badly wounded and was fully occupied in trying 
to get well I did not know everything that was going on. I have 
already written to Mexico to three of my friends who were present 
throughout the conquest to send me an account [of what took place], 
so that the matter should not be in doubt. If I do not repeat here all 
that they say on the subject, I submit myself to the conquerors for 
correction, but I know without any doubt that Bernaldino Vásquez de 
Tápia, when on the road had a bad fever and remained at a town 



296 NEGOTIATIONS WITH 

called ? * * * , and that Pedro de Alvarado went towards Mexico 
and turned back on the road, and that it was then that those four 
chieftains whom he took with him gave him the name of Tonatio, 
which in the Mexican language means Sun, and so they called him 
from that time on. They gave him that name because he was of fine 
presence and active and of good features and bearing, so that both in 
face and in speech and in everything else he was so pleasing, that he 
appeared always to be smiling. I also know what I have stated that 
these said Captains never arrived at Mexico, for when they set out from 
our camp all the soldiers were distressed at their going, and we said to 
our Captain, * why send two such excellent men when there is a chance 
that they may be killed ' ; so Cortes wrote to them at once to return. 
I am not quite sure about it, I leave it to the judgment of those who 
were present. Others of the Conquistadores have told me that as 
Bemaldino Vásquez de Tápia was ill in one of the towns, that the 
messengers informed Montezuma of the fact, and he sent to say that 
neither he nor Pedro de Alvarado should proceed any further, for if 
they should go to Mexico there would not be a thing that would not 
be clearly known to all the soldiers.'' 



CHAPTER LXXXI. 



How the people of Cholula sent four Indians of little consequence 
to make their excuses for not having come to TIaxcala, and 
what happened about it. 

I HAVE already said in the last chapter how our Captain 
sent messengers to Cholula to tell the Caciques of that 
City to come and see us at TIaxcala. When the Caciques 
understood what Cortes ordered them to do, they thought 
that it would be sufficient to send four unimportant Indians 
to make their excuses, and to say that because they were 
ill they had not come, and they brought neither food nor 
anything else, but merely stated that curt reply. The 
Caciques of TIaxcala were present when these messengers 
arrived, and they said to our Captain, that the people of 
Cholula had sent those Indians to make a mock of him 



THE CACIQUES OF CIlOLlJA. 297 

and of all of us, for they were only commoners of no 
standing; so Cortes at once sent them back with four 
other Cempoala Indians to tell the people of Cholula that 
they must send some chieftains, and as the distance w^ 
only five leagues that they must arrive within three days, 
otherwise he should look on them as rebels ; that when 
they came he wished to tell them some things necessary 
for the salvation of their souls and for the cleanliness of 
their well being, and to receive them as friends and brothers 
as he had received their neighbours the people of Tlaxcala, 
and that if they decided otherwise and did not wish for 
our friendship that we should take measures which would 
displease them and anger them. 

When the Caciques of Cholula had listened to that 
embassy they answered that they were not coming to 
Tlaxcala, for the Tlaxcalans were their enemies, and they 
knew that they [the Tlaxcalans] had said many evil things 
about them and about their Lord Montezuma ; that it was 
for us to come to their city and to leave the confines of 
Tlaxcala, and that then if they did not do what they ought 
to do we could treat them as such as we had sent to say 
they were. 

When our Captain saw that the excuse that they made 
was a just one we resolved to go to Cholula, and as soon 
as the Caciques of Tlaxcala perceived that we were deter- 
mined to go there, they said to Cortes, " So you wish to 
trust to the Mexicans and not to us who are your friends, 
we have already told you many times that you must 
beware of the people of Cholula and of the power of 
Mexico, and so that you can receive all the support 
possible from us, we have got ready ten thousand warriors 
to accompany you." Cortes thanked them very heartily 
for this, but after consultation with all of us it was agreed 
that it would not be advisable to take so many warriors to 
a country in which we were seeking friends, and that it 



29S PREPARATIONS FOR THE MARCH. 

would be better to take only one thousand, and this num- 
ber we asked of the Tlaxcalans and said that the rest 
should remain in their houses. Let us leave this discussion 
and I will tell about our march.


CHAPTER PART I 

I : The author sets forth towards the Western Islands, in 
the service of the West India Company of France. 
They meet with an EngUsh frigate, and arrive at the 
island of Tortuga 9 

II : Description of the island of Tortuga : of the fruits and 
plants there growing : how the French settled there, 
at two several times, and cast out the Spaniards, first 
masters thereof. The author of this book was twice 
sold in the said Island 14 

III : Description of the great and famous Island of Hispaniola 23 

IV : Of the Fruits, Trees, and Animals that are found at 

Hispaniola 27 

V : Of all sorts of quadruped animals and birds that are 

found in this island. As also a relation of the French 
Buccaneers 39 

VI : Of the origin of the most famous Pirates of the coasts of 

America. A notable exploit of Pierre le Grand 55 v/ 

VII : After what manner the Pirates arm their vessels, and 

how they regulate their voyages 59 y^ 

PART II 

I : Origin of Francis L'Ollonais, and beginning of his 

robberies 81 

II : L'Ollonais equips a fleet to land upon the Spanish islands 
of America, with intent to rob, sack, and bum what- 
ever he met 87 

III : L'Ollonais makes new preparations to take the city of 

St James de Leon ; as also that of Nicaragua, where 

he miserably perishes loi 

IV : Of the origin and descent of Captain Henry Morgan — his 

exploits and a continuation of the most remarkable 
actions of his life 119 

V : Some account of the island of Cuba. Captain Morgan 

attempts to preserve the isle of St Catharine as a 
refuge and nest to Pirates ; but fails of his designs. 
He arrives at and takes the village of El Puerto del 
Principe 
VI : Captain Morgan resolves to attack and plunder the city 
of Porto Bello. To this effect he equips a fleet, ana 
with little expense and small forces, takes the said place 135 



127 s/ 



viii CONTENTS 



VI r: Captain Morgan takes the city of Maracaibo, on the 
coast of New Venezuela. Piracies committed in those 
seas. Ruin of three Spanish ships that were set forth 
to hinder the robberies of the Pirates 143 



PART III 

I : Captain Morgan goes to the isle of Hispaniola to equip a 
new fleet, with intent to pillage again upon the coasts 
of the West Indies 173 

II : What happened in the river De la Hacha 175 

III : Captain Morgan leaves the island of Hispaniola, and 

goes to that of St Catharine, which he takes 179 

IV : Captain Morgan takes the Castle of Chagre, with four 

hundred men sent for this purpose from the Isle of 
St Catharine 185 

V : Captain Morgan departs from the Castle of Chagre, at 
the head of twelve hundred men, with design to take 
the city of Panama 192 

VI : Captain Morgan sends several canoes and boats to the 
South Sea. He sets fire to the city of Panama. 
Robberies and cruelties committed there by the 
Pirates till their return to the Castle of Chagre 208 -i 

VII : Of a voyage made by the author along the coasts of 
Costa Rica, at his return towards Jamaica. WTiat 
happened most remarkable in the said voyage. Some 
observations made by him at that time 224 

VIII : The author departs towards the Cape of Gracias a Dios. 
Of the commerce which here the Pirates exercise with 
the Indians. His arrival at the Island De los Pinos ; 
and, finally, his return to Jamaica 233 

IX : The relation of the shipwreck which Monsieur Bertram 
Ogeron, Governor of the isle of Tortuga, suffered near 
the Isles of Guadanillas. How both he and his com- 
panions fell into the hands of the Spaniards. By 
what arts he escaped their hands, and preserved his 
life. The enterprise which he undertook against 
Porto Rico to deliver his people. The unfortunate 
success of that design 242 

X : A relation of what encounters lately happened at the 
islands of Cayana and Tobago between the Count de 
Estres, Admiral of France, in America, and the Heer 
Jacob Binkes, Vice- Admiral of the United Provinces, 
in the same parts 249 

XI : Adventures of Captain Cook, in the year 1678. He is 
taken by the Spaniards. Bold exploits, and revenge 
of his losses, performed by some few Buccaneers that 
were on board his ship 254 

XII : A brief account of Captain Sharp and other his com- 
panions ; their voyage from Jamaica unto the province 
of Darien and South Sea ; with the robberies and 
assaults they committed there for the space of three 
years, till their return for England in the year 1682. 
Given by one of the Buccaneers who was present at 
those transactions 257 



CONTENTS 



PART JV 
CBAmu rAci 

The Preface to the Reader 289 

I : Captain Coxon, Sawkins, Sharp, and others set forth in 
a fleet towards the province of Darien, upon the con- 
tinent of America. Their designs to pillage and 
plunder in those parts. Number of their ships, and 
strength of their forces by sea and land 297 

II : They march towards the town of Santa Maria with 
design to take it. The Indian King of Darien meets 
. them by the way. Difficulties of this march, with 
other occurrences till they arrive at the place 301 

III : They take the town of Santa Maria with no loss of men, 
and but small booty of what they fought for. Descrip- 
tion of the place, country, and river adjacent. They 
resolve to go and plunder for the second time the city 
of Panama 306 

IV : The Buccaneers leave the town of Santa Maria, and 
proceed by sea to take Panama. Extreme difficulties, 
with sundry accidents and dangers of that voyage 309 
V : Shipwreck of Mr Ringrose, the author of this narrative. 
He is taken by the Spaniards, and miraculously by 
them preserved. Several other accidents and 
disasters which befel him after the loss of his com- 
panions till he found them again. Description of the 
Gulf of Vallona 312 

VI : The Buccaneers prosecute their voyage, till they come 
within sight of Panama. They take several barks 
and prisoners by the way. Are descried by the 
Spaniards before their arrival. They order the 
Indians to kill the prisoners 318 

VII : They arrive within sight of Panama. Are encountered 
by three small men-of-war. They fight them with 
only 68 men, and utterly defeat them, taking two of 
the said vessels. Description of that bloody fight. They 
take several ships at the Isle of Perico before Panama 32 1 
VIII : Description of the state and condition of Panama, and 
the parts adjacent. What vessels they took while they 
blocked up the said Port. Captain Coxon with 
seventy more returns home. Sawkins is chosen in chief 327 

IX : Captain Sawkins, chief commander of the Buccaneers, 
is killed before Puebla Nueva. They are repulsed 
from the said place. Captain Sharp chosen to be 
their leader. Many more of their company leave them 
and return home overland 333 

X : They depart from the island of Cayboa to the island of 
Gorgona, where they careen their vessels. Description 
of this isle. They resolve to go and plunder Arica, 
leaving their design of Guayaquil 338 

XI : The Buccaneers depart from the isle of Gorgona, with 
design to plunder Arica. They lose one another by the 
way. They touch at the Isle of Plate, or Drake's' Isle, 
where they meet again. Description of this isle. 
Some memoirs of Sir Francis Drake. An account of 
this voyage and the coasts all along. They sail as far in 
a fortnight as the Spaniards usually do in three months 345 



K CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PACE 

XII : Captain Sharp and his company depart from the Isle of 
Plate in prosecution of their voyage towards Arica. 
They take two Spanish vessels by the way, and learn 
intelligence from the enemy. Eight of their company 
destroyed at the Isle of Gallo. Tediousness of this 
voyage, and great hardships they endured. Descrip- 
tion of the coast all along, and their sailings 354 

XIII : A continuation of their long and tedious voyage to 
Arica, with a description of the coasts and sailings 
thereunto. Great hardship they endured for want 
of water and other provisions. They are descried at 
Arica, and dare not land there — the country being all 
in arms before them. They retire from thence, and 
go to Puerto de Hilo, close by Arica. Here they land, 
take the town with little or no loss on their side, 
refresh themselves with provisions ; but in the end 
are cheated by the Spaniards, and forced shamefully 
to retreat from thence 367 

XIV : The Buccaneers depart from the Port of Hilo, and sail 
to that of Coquimbo. They are descried before their 
arrival. Notwithstanding they land ; are encoun- 
tered by the Spaniards ; and put them to flight. 
They take, plunder, and fire the City of la Serena. A 
description thereof. A stratagem of the Spaniards, 
in endeavouring to fire their ship, discovered and 
prevented. They are deceived again by the Spaniards, 
and forced to retire from Coquimbo, without any 
ransom for the City or considerable pillage. They 
release several of their chief prisoners 380 

XV : The Buccaneers depart from Coquimbo for the isle of 
Juan Fernandez. An exact account of this voyage. 
Misery they endure, and great dangers they escape 
very narrowly there. They mutiny among them- 
selves, and choose Watling to be their chief comman- 
der. Description of the island. Three Spanish 
men-of-war meet with the Buccaneers at the said 
island, but these outbrave them on the one side and 
give them the slip on the other 390 

XVI : The Buccaneers depart from the isle of Juan Fernandez 
to that of Iquique. Here they take several prisoners, 
and learn intelligence of the posture of affairs at Arica. 
Cruelty committed upon one of the said prisoners who 
had rightly informed them. They attempt Arica the 
second time, and take the town, but are beaten out of 
it again before they could plunder — with great loss 
of men, many of them being killed, wounded, and 
made prisoners. Captain Watling, their chief Com- 
mander, is killed in this attack, and Captain Sharp 
presently chosen again, who leads them off, and 
through mountains of difficulties makes a bold retreat 
to the ship 401 

XVII : A description of the Bay of Arica. They sail hence to 
the Port of Guasco, where they get provisions. A 
draft of the said port. They land again at Hilo to 
revenge the former affronts, and take what they could 
find 410 



CONTENTS 



XI 



CHAPTEK FACE 

XVIII : They depart from the Port of Hilo to the Gulf of Nicoya, 

where they take down their decks and mend the v 

sailing of their ship. Forty-seven of their companions 
leave them, and go home over land. A description 
of the Gulf of Nicoya. They take two barks and 
some prisoners there. Several other remarks belong- 
ing to this voyage '416 
XIX : They depart from the Gulf of Nicoya to Golfo Dulce, 
where they careen their vessel. An account of their 
sailings along the coast ; also a description of Golfo 
Dulce. The Spaniards force the Indians of Darien to 
a peace by a stratagem contrived in the name of the 
Enghsh 423 
XX : They depart from Golfo Dulce, to go and cruise under 
the equinoctial. Here they take a rich Spanish vessel 
with 37,000 pieces-of-eight, besides plate and other 
goods. They take also a packet-boat bound from 
Panama to Lima. An account of their sailings and 
the coast along 428 
XXI : They take another Spanish ship richly laden under the 
equinoctial. They make several dividends of their 
booty among themselves. They arrive at the Isle of 
Plate, where they are in danger of being all massacred 
by their slaves and prisoners. Their departure thence 
for the port and bay of Paita, with design to plunder 
the said place 433 
XXII : They arrive at Paita, where they are disappointed of 
their expectations, as not daring to land, seeing all 
the country alarmed before them. They bear away 
for the Strait of Magellan. Description of the bay 
and port of Paita, and Colan. An account of their 
sailings towards the Strait aforementioned 439 

XXIII : The Buccaneers arrive at a place incognito, to which 
they give the name of the Duke of York's Islands. 
A description of the said islands and of the gulf, or 
lagoon, wherein they lie, so far as it was searched. 
They remain there many days by stress of weather, not 
without great danger of being lost. An account of 
some other remarkable things that happened there 447 

XXIV : They depart from the English Gulf in quest of the 
Strait of Magellan, which they cannot find. They 
return home by an unknown way, never navigated 
before 455 

XXV : The Buccaneers continue their navigation, without 
seeing any land, till they arrive at the Caribbean 
Islands in the West Indies. They give away their 
ship to some of their companions that were poor, and 
disperse for several countries. The author of this 
Journal arrives in England 466 



LIST OF FULL-PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS 

Sir Henry Morgan Frontispiece 

PAGE 

Bartholomew Portugues 65 

Rock Brasiliano 71 

Francis L'Ollonais 83 

L'Ollonais' Brutalities 105 

Puerto del Principe Taken and Sacked 149 

The Spanish Armada Destroyed by Capt. Morgan 163 

The Country and City of Panama 193 

Battle before Panama 209 

Map of the South Seas and Coasts 287 



ADVENTURES OF BUCCANEERS 

By Andrew Lang ^ 

Most of us, as boys, have envied the buccaneers. The 
greatest of all boys. Canon Kingsley, once wrote a pleasing 
and regretful poem in which the Last Buccaneer represents 
himself as a kind of picturesque philanthropist : 

** There were forty craft in Aves that were both swift and stout. 
All furnished well with small arms, and cannons round about ; 
And a thousand men in Aves made laws so fair and free. 
To choose their valiant captains and obey them loyally. 
Thence we sailed against the Spaniard with his hoards of plate and 

gold. 
Which he wrung with cruel tortures from Indian folk of old ; 
Likewise the merchant captains, with hearts as hard as stone, 
Who flog men and keel-haul them, and starve them to the bone." 

The buccaneer is " a gallant sailor ", according to Kingsley 's 
poem — a Robin Hood of the waters, who preys only on the 
wicked rich, or the cruel and Popish Spaniard, and the 
extortionate shipowner. For his own part, when he is not 
rescuing poor Indians, the buccaneer lives mainly " for climate 
and the affections " : 

" Oh, sweet it was in Aves to hear the landward breeze, 
A swing with good tobacco in a net between the trees. 
With a negro lass to fan you, while you listened to the roar 
Of the breakers on the reef outside that never touched the shore." 

This is delightfully idyllic, like the lives of the Tahitian 
shepherds in The Anti- Jacobin — the shepherds whose occu- 
pation was a sinecure, as there were no sheep in Tahiti. 

Yet the vocation was not really so touchingly chivalrous 
as the poet would have us deem. One Joseph Esquemeling, 
himself a buccaneer, has written the history and described 
the exploits of his companions in plain prose, warning eager 

* Reprinted, by kind permission of Messrs Longmans, Gieen and Co., 
from his Essays in Little.. 



xiv ADVENTURES OF BUCCANEERS 

youths that " pieces-of -eight do not grow on every tree ", 
as many raw recruits have beUeved. Mr EsquemeUng's 
account of these matters may be purchased, with a great 
deal else that is instructive and entertaining, in The History 
of the Buccaneers in America. My edition (of 1810) is a dumpy 
Uttle book, in very small type, and quite a crowd of publishers 
took part in the venture. The older editions are difficult to 
procure if your pockets are not stuffed with pieces-of-eight. 
You do not often find even this volume, but " when found 
make a note of ", and you have a reply to Canon Kingsley. 

A charitable old Scotch lady, who heard our ghostly foe 
evil spoken of, remarked that " If we were all as diligent and 
conscientious as the Devil, it would be better for us ". Now, 
the buccaneers were certainly models of diligence and con- 
scientiousness in their own industry, which was to torture people 
till they gave up their goods, and then to run them through 
the body, and spend the spoils over drink and dice. Except 
Dampier, who was a clever man, but a poor buccaneer (Mr 
Clark Russell has written his life), they were the most hideously 
ruthless miscreants that ever disgraced the earth and the sea. 
But their courage and endurance were no less notable than 
their greed and cruelty, so that a moral can be squeezed even 
out of these abandoned miscreants. The soldiers and sailors 
who made their way within gunshot of Khartoum, overcoming 
thirst, hunger, heat, the desert, and the gallant children of 
the desert, did not fight, march, and suffer more bravely than 
the scoundrels who sacked Maracaibo and burned Panama. 
Their good qualities were no less astounding and exemplary 
than their almost incredible wickedness. They did not lie 
about in hammocks .much, listening to the landward wind 
among the woods — the true buccaneers. To tell the truth, 
most of them had no particular cause to love the human 
species. They were often Europeans who had been sold into 
slavery on the West Indian plantations, where they learned 
lessons of cruelty by suffering it. Thus Mr Joseph Esquemel- 
ing, our historian, was beaten, tortured, and nearly starved to 
death in Tortuga, " so I determined, not knowing how to get 
any living, to enter into the order of the pirates or robbers of 
the sea ". The poor Indians of the isles, much pitied by 
Kingsley's buccaneer, had a habit of sticking their prisoners 
all over with thorns, wrapped in oily cotton, whereto they 



ADVENTURES OF BUCCANEERS xv 

then set fire. " These cruelties many Christians have seen 
while they Uved among these barbarians". Mr Esquemeling 
was to see, and inflict, plenty of this kind of torment, which 
was not out of the way nor unusual. One planter alone had 
killed over a hundred of his servants — " the English did the 
same with theirs ". 

A buccaneer voyage began in stealing a ship, collecting 
desperadoes, and torturing the local herdsmen till they gave 
up their masters' flocks, which were salted as provisions. 
Articles of service were then drawn up, on the principle *' no 
prey, no pay ". The spoils, when taken, were loyally divided 
as a rule, though Captain Morgan, of Wales, made no more 
scruple about robbing his crew than about barbecuing a 
Spanish priest. " They are very civil and charitable to each 
other, so that if any one wants what another has, with great 
wilhngness they give it to one another ". In other matters 
they did not in the least resemble the early Christians. A 
fellow nicknamed The Portuguese may be taken as our first 
example of their commendable qualities. 

With a small ship of four guns he had taken a great one 
of twenty guns, with 70,000 pieces-of -eight. ... He himself, 
however, was presently captured by a larger vessel, and 
imprisoned on board. Being carelessly watched, he escaped 
on two earthen jars (for he could not swim), reached the woods 
in Campechy, and walked for a hundred and twenty miles 
through the bush. His only food was a few shell-fish, and by 
way of a knife he had a large nail, which he whetted to an edge 
on a stone. Having made a kind of raft, he struck a river, and 
paddled to Golpho Triste, where he found congenial pirates. 
With twenty of these, and a boat, he returned to Campechy, 
where he had been a prisoner, and actually captured the large 
ship in which he had lain captive I Bad luck pursued him, 
however : his prize was lost in a storm*; he reached Jamaica 
in a canoe, and never afterwards was concerned as leader in 
any affair of distinction. Not even Odysseus had more 
resource, nor was more long-enduring ; but Fortune was The 
Portuguese's foe. 

Braziliano, another buccaneer, served as a pirate before 
the mast, and " was beloved and respected by all ". Being 
raised to command, he took a plate ship ; but this success 
was of indifferent service to his otherwise amiable character. 



xvi ADVENTURES OF BUCCANEERS 

" He would often appear foolish and brutish when in drink ", 
and has been known to roast Spaniards ahve on wooden spits 
" for not showing him hog yards where he might steal swine ". 
One can hardly suppose that Kingsley would have regretted 
this buccaneer, even if he had been the last, which unluckily 
he was not. His habit of sitting in the street beside a barrel 
of beer, and shooting all passers-by who would not drink with 
him, provoked remark, and was an act detestable to all 
friends of temperance principles. 

Francois L'Olonnois, from Southern France, had been 
kidnapped, and sold as a slave in the Caribbee Islands. 
Recovering his freedom, he plundered the Spanish, says my 
buccaneer author, " till his unfortunate death ". With two 
canoes he captured a ship which had been sent after him, 
carrying ten guns and a hangman for his express benefit. This 
hangman, much to the fellow's chagrin, L'Olonnois put to 
death like the rest of his prisoners. His great achievements 
were in the Gulf of Venezuela or Bay of Maracaibo. The gulf 
is a strong place ; the mouth, no wider than a gun-shot, is 
guarded by two islands. Far up the inlet is Maracaibo, a town 
of three thousand people, fortified and surrounded by woods. 
Yet farther up is the town of Gibraltar. To attack these was 
a desperate enterprise ; but L'Olonnois stole past the forts, 
and frightened the townsfolk into the woods. As a rule the 
Spaniards made the poorest resistance ; there were examples 
of courage, but none of conduct. With strong forts, heavy 
guns, many men, provisions, and ammunition, they quailed 
before the desperate valour of the pirates. The towns were 
sacked, the fugitives hunted out in the woods, and the most 
abominable tortures were applied to make them betray their 
friends and reveal their treasures. When they were silent, 
or had no treasures to declare, they were hacked, twisted, 
burned, and starved to death. 

Such were the manners of L'Olonnois ; and Captain 
Morgan, of Wales, was even more ruthless. 

Gibraltar was well fortified and strengthened after Mara- 
caibo fell ; new batteries were raised, the way through the 
woods was barricaded, and no fewer than eight hundred 
men were under arms to resist a small pirate force, exhausted 
by debauch, and having its retreat cut off by the forts at the 
mouth of the great salt-water loch. But L'Olonnois did not 



ADVENTURES OF BUCCANEERS xvii 

blench : he told the men that audacity was their one hope, 
also that he would pistol the first who gave ground. The men 
cheered enthusiastically, and a party of three hundred and 
fifty landed. The barricaded way they could not force, and 
in a newly cut path they met a strong battery which fired 
grape. But L'Olonnois was invincible. He tried that old 
trick which rarely fails, a sham retreat, and this lured the 
Spaniards from their earthwork on the path. The pirates 
then turned, sword in hand, slew two hundred of the enemy, 
and captured eight guns. The town yielded, the people fled 
to the woods, and then began the wonted sport of torturing 
the prisoners. Maracaibo they ransomed afresh, obtained 
a pilot, passed the forts with ease, and returned after sacking 
a small province. On a dividend being declared, they parted 
260,000 pieces-of-eight among the band, and spent the pillage 
in a revel of three weeks. 

L'Olonnois " got great repute " by this conduct, but I 
rejoice to add that in a raid on Nicaragua he " miserably 
perished ", and met what Mr Esquemeling calls " his un- 
fortunate death ". For L'Olonnois was really an ungentle- 
manly character. He would hack a Spaniard to pieces, tear 
out his heart, and " gnaw it with his teeth like a ravenous 
wolf, saying to the rest ' I will serve you all alike if you show 
me not another way ' " (to a town which he designed attack- 
ing). In Nicaragua he was taken by the Indians, who, being 
entirely on the Spanish side, tore him to pieces and burned 
him. Thus we really must not be deluded by the professions 
of Mr Kingsley's sentimental buccaneer, with his pity for 
" the Indian folk of old ". 

Except Denis Scott, a worthy bandit in his day, Captain 
Henry Morgan is the first renowned British buccaneer. He 
was a young Welshman, who, after having been sold as a slave 
in Barbadoes, became a sailor of fortune. With about four 
hundred men he assailed Puerto Bello. " If our number is 
small ", he said, " our hearts are great ", and so he assailed 
the third city and place of arms which Spain then possessed 
in the West Indies. The entrance of the harbour was protected 
by two strong castles, judged as " almost impregnable ", 
while Morgan had no artillery of any avail against fortresses. 
Morgan had the luck to capture a Spanish soldier, whom he 
compelled to parley with the garrison of the castle. This he 



xviii ADVENTURES OF BUCCANEERS 

stormed and blew up, massacring all its defenders, while with 
its guns he disarmed the sister fortress. When all but de- 
feated in a new assault, the sight of the English colours 
animated him afresh. He made the captive monks and nuns 
carry the scaling ladders ; in this unwonted exploit the poor 
religious folk lost many of their numbers. The wall was 
mounted, the soldiers were defeated, though the Governor 
fought like a Spaniard of the old school, slew many pirates 
with his own hand, and pistolled some of his own men for 
cowardice. He died at his post, refusing quarter, and falling 
like a gentleman of Spain. Morgan, too, was not wanting in 
fortitude : he extorted 100,000 pieces-of-eight from the 
Governor of Panama, and sent him a pistol as a sample of the 
gun wherewith he took so great a city. He added that he 
would return and take this pistol out of Panama ; nor was he 
less good than his word. In Cuba he divided 250,000 pieces-of- 
eight, and a great booty in other treasure. A few weeks saw 
it all in the hands of the tavern-keepers and women of the 
place. 

Morgan's next performance was a new sack of Maracaibo, 
now much stronger than L'Olonnois had found it. After the 
most appalling cruelties, not fit to be told, he returned, passing 
the castles at the mouth of the port by an ingenious stratagem. 
Running boatload after boatload of men to the land side, he 
brought them back by stealth, leading the garrison to expect 
an attack from that quarter. The guns were massed to land- 
ward, and no sooner was this done than Morgan sailed up 
through the channel with but little loss. Why the Spaniards 
did not close the passage with a boom does not appear. 
Probably they were glad to be quit of Morgan on any terms. 

A great Spanish fleet he routed by the ingenious employ- 
ment of a fire-ship. In a later expedition a strong place was 
taken by a curious accident. One of the buccaneers was shot 
through the body with an arrow. He drew it out, wrapped it 
in cotton, fired it from his musket, and so set light to a roof 
and burned the town. 

His raid on Panama was extraordinary for the endurance 
of his men. For days they lived on the leather of bottles and 
belts. " Some, who were never out of their mothers' kitchens, 
may ask how these pirates could eat and digest these pieces 
of leather, so hard and dry ? Whom I answer — that could they 



ADVENTURES OF BUCCANEERS xix 

once experience what hunger, or rather famine is, they would 
find the way, as the pirates did ". It was at the close of this 
march that the Indians drove wild bulls among them ; but 
they cared very little for these new allies of the Spaniards : 
beef, in any form, was only too welcome. 

Morgan burned the fair cedar houses of Panama, but lost 
the plate ship with all the gold and silver out of the churches. 
How he tortured a poor wretch who chanced to wear a pair 
of taffety trousers belonging to his master, with a small silver 
key hanging out, it is better not to repeat. The men only got 
two hundred pieces-of -eight each, after all their toil, for their 
Welshman was indeed a thief, and bilked his crews, no less 
than he plundered the Spaniards, without remorse. Finally, 
he sneaked away from the fleet with a ship or two ; and it is 
to be feared that Captain Morgan made rather a good thing by 
dint of his incredible cruelty and villainy. 

And so we leave Mr Esquemeling, whom Captain Morgan 
also deserted ; for who would linger long when there is not 
even honour among thieves ? Alluring as the pirate's pro- 
fession is, we must not forget that it had a seamy side, and 
was by no means all rum and pieces-of-eight. And there is 
something repulsive to a generous nature in roasting men be- 
cause they will not show you where to steal hogs. 



AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER 
CONCERNING THIS SECOND EDITION 

The first edition of this History of the Buccaneers was received 
with such general applause of most people, hut more especially 
of the learned, as to encourage me towards obliging the public 
with this second impression, though within the space of three 
months of time. This I have completed with the same cuts and 
maps, and all the other embellishments which the former had ; 
and yet rendered it by the closeness of its character more easy to 
he purchased, as being comprehended in a fewer number of sheets 
of paper. Unto this second edition I have also added some 
relations which have been imparted to me from good and 
authentic hands ; wherein are contained several other hold 
exploits and attempts, performed of late years by the same 
Buccaneers, especially since the time that the author of the first 
impression left those parts of the West Indies, and published his 
book in Holland. These are comprehended in two or three 
chapters at the latter end of this second edition, and do chiefly 
relate unto the adventures of Captain Cook in the year 1678, 
and the hazardous and hold attempts of Captain Sharp and 
others ; who lately, setting forth from famaica, penetrated into 
the South Sea, and there ransacked and pillaged, for the space of 
three years, all they could meet, returning at last homewards 
about the Tierra del Fuego, commonly called Terra Australis 
Incognita, beyond the Strait of Magellan ; and thus performing 
one of the boldest and longest voyages that ever was attempted in 
the world. Of all which voyage, and especially of all the 
soundings, ports, harbours, rivers, creeks, islands, rocks, towns, 
and cities belongiftg unto the whole navigation of the South Sea, 
he hath brought home such an exact description, and such complete 
maps, taken from the Spaniards themselves, who only navigate 
that ocean, as were never seen in these parts of the world before. 



2 ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER 

The very Journal of this triennial navigation, I am informed, is 
710W in the press, being published by a worthy gentleman of my 
acquaintance ; the perusal whereof I hope will acquit what I 
have said to be nothing more nor less than the very truth itself. 
What I here give my reader concerning Captain Sharp and his 
companions is only a short account of his transactions, which 
may serve for an accomplishment of this History of the 
Buccaneers (he being one of the same profession) ; which I 
received from the very hand of one of his seamen who was present 
at these exploits [and which was printing before I heard of the 
Journal of Captain Sharp) : the which likewise how far it will 
agree with the Journal itself [as I hear is almost ready to be 
published) I cannot easily declare, as having not seen nor perused 
the said book. Yet thus much I am induced to believe of this 
narrative, though never so shortly compiled, that it will not much 
deviate from the substance of what matter of fact will be there 
rehearsed, and that the said Journal, when published, will 
appear, for its novelty and curiosity, to be as it were a 
Second Part of this History of the Buccaneers. All which 
notwithstanding, something may be yet remaining behind of this 
nature, wherewith in di^e time I may chance to pleasure the public, 
but not to be added to this volume, but to be a volume of itself, 
this first volume of the Buccajteers being as full as it can be 
made. Whatever shall for the future be published by me shall 
be put into another volume. 



THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER 

The present volume, both for Us curiosity and ingenuity, I dare 
recommend to the perusal of our English nation, whose glorious 
actions it contains. What relates to the curiosity hereof, this 
piece, both of natural and human history, was no sooner published 
in the Dutch original than it was snatched up for the most curious 
libraries of Holland : it was translated into Spanish (two 
impressions thereof being sent into Spain in one year) ; it was 
taken notice of by the learned Academy of Paris ; and finally 
recommended as worthy of our esteem by the ingenious author of 
the ' Weekly Memorials for the Ingenious \ printed here at 
London about two years ago. Neither all this undeservedly, 
seeing it enlarges our acquaintance of natural history, so much 
prized a7id inquired for by the learned of this present age, with 
several observations not easily to be found in other accounts 
already received from America ; and, besides, it informs us 
(with huge novelty) of as great and bold attempts in point of 
military conduct and valour as ever were performed by mankind, 
without excepting here either Alexander the Great or Julius 
CcBsar or the rest of the Nine Worthies of Fame. Of all which 
actions, as we cannot but confess ourselves to have been ignorant 
hitherto (the very name of ' Buccaneers ' being as yet known but 
to few of the ingenious, as their lives, laws, and conversation 
are in a manner unto none), so can they not choose but be admired, 
out of this ingenious Author, by whosoever is curious to learn the 
various revolutions of human affairs. But, more especially by 
our English nation, as unto whom these things more narrowly do 
appertain — we having here more than half the book filled with 
the unparalleled if not inimitable adventures and heroic exploits 
of our own countrymen and relations, whose undaunted and 
exemplary courage, when called upon by our King and Country, 
we ought to emulate. 

From whence it has proceeded that nothing of this kind was 



4 TRANSLATOR TO THE READER 

ever as yet published in England I cannot easily determine, 
except, as some will say, from some secret ' Ragion di Stato '. 
Let the reason be as it will, this is certain, so much the more we 
are obliged to this present author, who, though a stranger to our 
nation, yet with that candour and fidelity has recorded our actions, 
as to render the metal of our true English valour to be the more 
believed and feared abroad than if these things had been divulged 
by ourselves at home. From hence peradventure will other 
nations learn that the English people are of their genius more 
inclinable to act than to write ; seeing as well they as we have 
lived unacquainted with these actions of our nation, until such 
time as a foreign author to our country came to tell them. 

Besides the merit of this piece for its curiosity, another point 
of no less esteem is the truth and sincerity wherewith everything 
seems to be penned. No greater ornament or dignity can be 
added to history, either human or natural, than truth. All other 
embellishments, if this be failing, are of little or no esteem ; if 
this be delivered, are either needless or superfluous. What 
concerns this requisite in our author, his lines do everywhere 
declare the faithfulness and sincerity of his mind. He writes 
not by hearsay, but was an eye-witness, as he somewhere tells 
you, to all and every one of the bold and hazardous attempts 
which he relates. And these he delivers with such candour of 
style, such ingenuity of mind, such plainness of words, such 
conciseness of periods, so much divested of rhetorical hyperboles 
or the least flourishes of eloquence, so hugely void of passion or 
national reflections, that he strongly persuades all along to the 
credit of what he says — yea, raises the mind of the reader to 
believe these things far greater than what he has said ; and, 
having read him, leaves only this scruple or concern behind, that 
you can read him no longer. In a word, such are his deserts 
that some persons peradventure would not stickle to compare him 
to the Father of Historians, Philip de Comines : at least, thus 
much may be said with all truth imaginable, that he resembles 
that great author in many of his excellent qualities. 

I know some persons have objected to the greatness of these 
prodigious adventures, intimating that the resistance our Bucca- 
neers fomid in America was everywhere but small. For the 
Spaniards, say they, in the West Indies are become of late 
years nothing less, but rather much more, degenerate than in 
Europe, the co7itinual peace they have enjoyed in those parts, 



TRANSLATOR TO THE READER 5 

the defect of military discipline, and European soldiers for their 
commanders, much contributing hereunto. But more especially 
and above all other reasons the very luxury of the soil and riches, 
the extreme heat of those countries and influence of the stars being 
such as totally incline their bodies to an infinite effeminacy and 
cowardice of mind. 

Unto these reasons I shall only answer in brief : This History 
will convince them to be manifestly false. For, as to the 
contifiual peace here alleged, we know thai no peace could ever be 
established ' beyond the Line,' since the first possession of the 
West Indies by the Spaniards till the burning of Panama. At 
that time, or a few months before. Sir William Godolphin by his 
prudent negociation in quality of Ambassador for our most 
Gracious Monarch concluded at Madrid a peace to be observed 
even beyond the Line and through the whole extent of the Spanish 
Dominions in the West Indies. This transaction gave the 
Spaniards new causes of complaint against our proceedings, 
that no sooner a peace had been established for those parts of 
America but our Forces had taken and burnt both Chagre, St 
Catharine, and Panama. But our reply was convincing : 
That, whereas eight or ten months had been allowed by Articles 
for the publishing of the said peace through all the dominions 
of both monarchies in America, those hostilities had been 
committed, not only without orders from his Majesty of England 
but also within the space of the said eight or ten months of time. 
Until that time the Spanish inhabitants of America being, as it 
were, in a perpetual war with Europe, certain it is that no coasts 
nor kingdoms in the world have been more frequently infested 
or alarmed with the invasions of several nations than theirs. 
Thus, from the very beginning of their conquests in America, 
both English, French, Dutch, Portuguese, Swedes, Danes, Cour- 
landers, and all other nations that navigate the ocean have 
frequented the West Indies, and filled them with their robberies 
and assaults. From these occasions have they been in continual 
watch and ward, and kept their militia in constant exercise, 
as also their garrisons pretty well provided and paid ; as fearing 
every sail they discovered at sea to be pirates of one nation or 
another. But much more especially, since that CuraQoa, 
Tortuga, and famaica have been inhabited by English, French, 
and Dutch, and bred up that race of huntsmen than which no 
other ever was more desperate nor more mortal enemies to the 



6 TRANSLATOR TO THE READER 

Spaniards, called Buccaneers. Now shall we say thai these 
people, through too long continuation of peace, have utterly 
abolished the exercises of war, having been all along incessantly 
vexed with the tumults and alarms thereof? 

In like manner is it false to accuse their defect of military 
discipline for want of European commanders. For who knows 
not that all places, both military and civil, through those vast 
dominions of the West Indies are provided out of Spain ? And 
those of the militia most commonly given to expert commanders 
trained up from their infancy in the Wars of Europe, either in 
Africa, Milan, Sicily, Naples, or Flanders, fighting against 
either English, French, Dutch, Portuguese, or Moors ? Yea, 
their very garrisons, if you search them in those parts, will 
peradventure be found to be stocked three parts to four with 
soldiers both born and bred in the kingdom of Spain. 

From these considerations it may be inferred what little 
difference ought to be allowed betwixt the Spanish soldiers, 
inhabitants of the West Indies, and those of Europe. And how 
little the soil or climate has influenced or caused their courage to 
degenerate towards cowardice or basejiess of mind. As if the 
very same arguments, deduced from the nature of that climate, 
did not equally militate against the valour of our famous 
Buccaneers, and represent this to be of as degenerate metal as 
theirs. 

But nothing can be more clearly evinced than is the valour of 
the American Spaniards, either soldiers or officers, by the sequel 
of this history. What men ever fought more desperately than 
the garrison of Chagre — their number being 314, and of all these 
only 30 remaining ; of which number scarce 10 were unwounded, 
and among them not one officer found alive ? Were not 600 
killed upon the spot at Panama, 500 at Gibraltar, almost as many 
more at Puerto del Principe, all dying with their arms in their 
hands and facing bravely the enemy for the defence of their 
country and private concerns ? Did not those of the town of 
San Pedro both fortify themselves, lay several ambuscades, and 
lastly sell their lives as dear as ever any European soldier could 
do, L'Ollonais being forced to gain step by step his advance unto 
the town with huge loss both of blood and men ? Many other in- 
stances might be produced out of this compendious volume of the 
generous resistance the Spaniards made in several places, though 
fortune favoured not their arms. 



TRANSLATOR TO THE READER 7 

Next, as to the personal valour of many of their commanders, 
what man ever behaved himself more briskly than the Governor 
of Gibraltar, than the Governor of Puerto del Principe, both 
dying for the defence of their towns; than Don Alonso del 
Campo, and others ? Or what examples can easily parallel 
the desperate courage of the Governor of Chagre, who, though 
the palisades were fired, the terrepleins [ramparts] were sunk 
into the ditch, the breaches were entered, the houses all burnt 
about him, the whole castle taken, his men all killed, yet would 
not admit of any quarter, but chose rather to die under his arms, 
being shot into the brain, than surrender himself as a prisoner 
to the Buccaneers ? What lion ever fought to the last gasp more 
obstinately than the Governor of Porto Bello, who, seeing the 
town entered by surprisal in the night, one chief castle blown 
up into the air, all the other forts and castles taken, his own 
assaulted several ways, both religious men and women placed at 
the front of the enemy to fix the ladders against the walls, yet 
spared not to kill as many of the said religious persons as he 
could ; and at last, the walls being scaled, the castle entered and 
taken, all his own men overcome by fire and sword, who had cast 
down their arms and begged mercy from the enemy, yet would 
admit of none for his own life ? Yea, with his own hands killed 
several of his soldiers, to force them to stand to their arms though 
all were lost. Yea, though his own wife and daughter begged of 
him upon their knees that he would save his life by craving 
quarter, though the enemy desired of him the same thing, yet 
would hearken to no cries nor persuasions, but they were forced 
to kill him, combating with his arms in his hands, being not 
otherwise able to take him prisoner as they were desirous to do. 
Shall these men be said to be influenced with cowardice, who thus 
acted to the very last scene of their own tragedies ? Or shall we 
rather say that they wanted not courage, but fortune ? — it being 
certainly true that he who is killed in a battle may be equally 
courageous with him that kills. And that whosoever derogates 
from the valour of the Spaniards in the West Indies dimiftishes 
in like manner the courage of the Buccaneers, his own countrymen, 
who have seemed to act beyond mortal men in America. 

Now, to say something concerning John Esquemcling, the first 
author of this history. I take him to be a Dutchman, or at least 
born in Flanders, notwithstanding that the Spanish translation 
represents him to be native of the kingdom of France — his printing 



8 TRANSLATOR TO THE READER 

this history originally in Dutch, which doubtless must he his 
native tongue, who otherwise was hut an illiterate man, together 
with the very sound of his name, convincing me thereunto. True 
it is, he set sail from France, and was some years at Tortuga, 
hut neither of these two arguments, drawn from the history, are 
prevalent. For, were he a Frenchman horn, how came he to 
learn the Dutch language so perfectly as to prefer it to his own — 
especially that not being spoken at Tortuga nor famaica, where 
he resided all the while ? 

I hope I have made this English translation something more 
plain and correct than the Spanish. Some few notorious faults, 
either of the printer or of the interpreter, I am sure I have 
redressed. But, the Spanish translator complaining much of 
the intricacy of style in the original (as flowing from a person 
who, as hath been said, was no scholar) as he was pardonable, 
being in great haste, for not rendering his own version so distinct 
and elaborate as he could desire — so must I be excused from the 
one, that is to say elegance, if I have cautiously declined the other, 
I mean confusion. 



t 



THE BUCCANEERS OF 
AMERICA 



PART I 

CHAPTER I 

The author sets forth towards the Western Islands, in the service 
of the West India Company of France. They meet with an 
English frigate, and arrive at the island of Tortuga 

We set sail from Havre de Grace, in France, in a ship called 
St fohn, the second day of May, in the year 1666. Our vessel 
was equipped with eight-and-twenty guns, 20 mariners, and 
220 passengers, including in this number those whom the 
Company sent as free passengers, as being in their service. 
Soon after we came to an anchor under the Cape of Barfleur, 
there to join seven other ships of the same West India 
Company, which were to come from Dieppe under the convoy 
of a man-of-war, mounted with seven-and-thirty guns and 
250 meny^ Of these ships two were bound for Senegal, five 
for the Laribbee Islands, and ours for the island of Tortuga. 
In the same place there gathered unto us about twenty sail 
of other ships that were bound for Newfoundland, with some 
Dutch vessels that were going for Nantes, Rochelle, and St 
Martins ; so that in all we made a fleet of thirty sail. Here 
we prepared to fight, putting ourselves into a convenient 
posture of defence, as having notice that four English frigates, 
of three-score guns each, did lie in wait for us about the Isle 
of Ornay. Our admiral, the Chevalier Sourdis, having dis- 



10 THE AUTHOR SETS FORTH 

tributed what orders he thought convenient, we set sail from 
thence with a favourable gale of wind. 'Presently after, some 
mists arising, these totally impeded the English frigates from 
discovering our fleet at sea. We steered our course as near 
as we could under the coast of France for fear of the enemy. 
As we sailed along, we met a vessel of Ostend, who complained 
to our admiral that a French privateer had robbed him that 
very morning. This complaint being heard, we endeavoured 
to pursue the said pirate ; but our labour was in vain, as not 
being able to overtake him. 

Our fleet, as we went along, caused no small fears and alarms 
to the inhabitants of the coasts of France, these judging us 
to be English and that we sought some convenient place for 
landing. To allay their frights, we used to hang out our 
colours ; but, notwithstanding, they would not trust usy 
After this we came to an anchor in the Bay of Conquet, in 
Brittany, nigh unto the Isle of Ushant, there to take in water. 
Having stored ourselves with fresh provisions at this place, 
we prosecuted our voyage, designing to pass by the Ras of 
Fonteneau and not expose ourselves to the Sorlingues, fearing 
the English vessels that were cruising thereabouts to meet us. 
This river Ras is of a current very strong and rapid, which, 
rolling over many rocks, disgorges itself into the sea on the 
coast of France, in the latitude of eight-and-forty degrees and 
ten minutes. For which reason this passage is very dangerous, 
all the rocks as yet being not thoroughly known. 
/ Here I shall not omit to mention the ceremony which at this 
passage, and some other places, is used by the mariners, and 
by them called ' Baptism ', although it may seem either little 
to our purpose or of no use. The master's mate clothed him- 
self with a ridiculous sort of garment that reached unto his 
feet, and on his head he put a suitable cap, which was made 
very burlesque. In his right hand he placed a naked wooden 
sword, and in his left a pot full of ink. His face was horribly 
blacked with soot, and his neck adorned with a collar of many 
little pieces of wood. Being thus apparelled, he commanded 
to be called before him every one of them who never had passed 
that dangerous place before. And then, causing them to kneel 
down in his presence, he made the sign of the Cross upon their 
foreheads with ink, and gave each one a stroke on the shoulders 
with his wooden sword. Meanwhile the standers-by did cast 



CEREMONY OF THE DUTCH ii 

a bucket of water upon every man's head ; and this was the 
conclusion of the ceremony. But, that being ended, every 
one of the baptized is obHged to give a bottle of brandy for 
his offering, placing it nigh the main-mast, and without 
speaking a word, even those who have no such liquor being 
not excused from this performance. In case the vessel never 
passed that way before, the Captain is obliged to distribute 
some wine among the mariners and other people in the ship. 
But, as for other gifts which the newly baptized do frequently 
offer, they are divided among the old seamen, and of them 
they make a banquet among themselves. / 

The Hollanders likewise do use to baptize such as never 
passed that way before. And not only at the passage above- 
mentioned, but also at the rocks called Berlingues, near the 
coast of Portugal, in the latitude of 39 degrees and 40 minutes, 
as being a passage very dangerous, especially by night, when 
through the obscurity thereof the rocks are not distinguish- 
able, by reason the land is very high, they use some such 
ceremony. But their manner of baptizing is quite distinct 
from that which we have described above as performed by 
the French. He, therefore, that is to be baptized is fastened, 
and hoisted up three times at the main-yard's end, as if he 
were a criminal. If he be hoisted the fourth time, in the 
name of the Prince of Orange or of the captain of the vessel, 
his honour is more than ordinary. Thus they are dipped, 
every one, several times into the main ocean. But he that is 
the first dipped has the honour of being saluted with a gun. 
Such as are not willing to fall are bound to pay twelve 
pence for their ransom ; if he be an officer in the ship, 
two shiUings; and, if a passenger, according to his pleasure. 
In case the ship never passed that way before, the captain 
is bound to give a small runlet of wine, which, if he does not 
perform, the mariners may cut off the stem of the vessel. 
All the profit which accrues by this ceremony is kept by the 
master's mate, who, after reaching their port, doth usually 
lay it out in wine, which is drunk amongst the ancient seamen. 
Some will say this ceremony was instituted by the Emperor 
Charles the Fifth ; howsoever, it is not found amongst his 
Laws. But here I leave these customs of the sea, and shall 
return to our voyage. 

Having passed the river Ras, we met with very good weather 



12 ARRIVAL AT ISLAND OF TORTUGA 

until we came to Cape Finisterre. Here a huge tempest of 
wind surprised us, and separated our ship from the rest that 
were in our company. This storm continued for the space of 
eight days, in which time it would move compassion to see 
how miserably the passengers were tumbled to and fro on all 
sides of the ship ; insomuch as the mariners in the performance 
of their duty were compelled to tread upon them everywhere. 
This uncouthsome weather being spent, we had again the 
use of very favourable gales until we came unto the Tropic 
of Cancer. This Tropic is nothing else but an imaginary 
circle which astrologers have invented in the heavens, and 
serves as a period to the progress of the sun towards the North 
Pole. It is placed in the latitude of 23 degrees and 30 minutes 
under the line. Here we were baptized the second time, 
after the same manner as before. The French do always 
perform this ceremony at this Tropic, as also under the Tropic 
of Capricorn, towards the South. In this part of the world 
we had very favourable weather, at which we were infinitely 
gladdened by reason of our great necessity of water. For 
at this time that element was already so scarce with us that 
we were stinted unto two half-pints per man every day. 

Being about the latitude of Barbados, we met an English 
frigate, or privateer, who first began to give us chase ; but, 
finding himself not to exceed us in strength, did presently 
steer away from us. This flight gave us occasion to pursue 
the said frigate, as we did, shooting at him several guns of 
eight-pound carriage. But at length he escaped, and we 
returned to our course. Not long after, we came within sight 
of the isle of Martinique. Our endeavours were bent towards 
the coast of the Isle of St Peter. But these were frustrated 
by reason of a storm which took us hereabouts. Hence we 
resolved to steer to the island of Guadaloupe. Yet neither 
this island could we reach by reason of the said storm, and 
thus we directed our course to the isle of Tortuga, which was 
the very same land we were bound unto. We passed along 
the coast of the isle of Porto Rico, which is extremely deli- 
cious and agreeable to the view, as being adorned with 
beautiful trees and woods, even to the tops of the mountains. 
After this, we discovered the island Hispaniola^ (of which I 

^ The English corruption of Espailola [" Little Spain "], the name 
given by Columbus to the island of Haiti, discovered by him in 1492, 



ARRIVAL AT ISLAND OF TORTUGA 13 

shall give a description in this book), and we coasted about it 
until we came unto the isle of Tortuga, our desired port. 
Here we anchored the seventh day of July in the same year, 
not having lost one man in the whole voyage. We unladed 
the goods that belonged unto the Company of the West Indies, 
and soon after the ship was sent to Cul de Sac with some 
passengers. 

whereon he established the first Spanish colony in the New World. 
Subsequently it was neglected and became the prey of freebooters and 
Buccaneers. In old Latin maps it is called Hispaniae Insula. Next to 
Cuba, it is the largest of the West Indian islands. It was later divided 
politically into the republics of Haiti and Santo Domingo, the latter 
called after the city of that name. 



CHAPTER II 

Description of the island of Tortuga : of the fruits and plants 
there growing ; how the French settled there, at two several 
times, and cast out the Spaniards, first masters thereof. The 
author of this hook was twice sold in the said island 

The island of Tortuga is situated on the North side of the 
famous and great island called Hispaniola [Haiti], nigh unto 
the continent thereof and in the latitude of twenty degrees 
and thirty minutes. Its just extent is threescore leagues 
about. The Spaniards, who gave name to this island, called 
it so from the shape of the land, which in some manner resem- 
bles a great sea-tortoise, called by them tortuga de mar. The 
country is very mountainous and full of rocks, yet, notwith- 
standing, hugely thick of lofty trees that cease not to grow 
upon the hardest of those rocks without partaking of a softer 
soil. Hence it comes that their roots, for the greatest part, 
are seen all over entangled among the rocks, not unlike unto 
the branching of ivy against our walls. That part of this 
island which stretches towards the North is totally disin- 
habited. The reason is, first, because it has proved to be very 
incommodious and unhealthy, and, secondly, for the rugged- 
ness of the coast, that gives no access to the shore, unless 
among rocks almost inaccessible. For this cause it is 
populated only on the Southern part, which has only one 
port that may be esteemed indifferently good. Yet this 
harbour has two several entries, or channels, which afford 
passage unto ships of 70 guns, the port itself being without 
danger and capable of receiving a great number of vessels. 
That part which is inhabited is divided into four other parts, 
of which the first is called the Low-Land, or Low-Country. 
This is the chiefest among the rest, because it contains the 
aforesaid port. The town is called Cayona, and here do live 

14 



THE ISLAND OF TORTUGA 13 

the chief and richest planters of the island. The second 
part is called the Middle Plantation. Its territory, or soil, 
is hitherto almost new, as being only known to be good for 
the culture of tobacco. The third is named Ringot. These 
places are situated towards the Western part of the island. 
The fourth, and last, is called The Mountain, in which place 
were made the first plantations that were cultivated upon 
this island. 

As to the wood that grows on the island, we have already 
said that the trees are exceedingly tall and pleasing to the 
sight ; whence no man will doubt but they may be applied 
unto several uses with great benefit. Such is the Yellow 
Saunder, which tree by the inhabitants of this country is 
called bois de chandelle, or in English Candlewood, because 
it burns like a candle, and serves them with light while they 
use their fishery in the night. Here also grows lignum 
sanctum, by others called guaiacum, the virtues of which are 
very well known, more especially unto them who observe 
not the sixth Commandment and are given to all manner 
of impure copulations, physicians drawing from hence, under 
several compositions, the greatest antidote for all venereal 
diseases, as also for cold and vicious humours. The trees 
likewise that afford gummi elemi grow here in great abundance, 
and in like manner radix Chinee, or China root ^ ; yet this is 
not so good as that which comes from other parts of the 
Western world. It is very white and soft, and serves for 
pleasant food unto the wild-boars when they can find nothing 
else. This island also is not deficient in aloes, nor an infinite 
number of other medicinal herbs, which may please the 
curiosity of such as are given to their contemplation. 
Moreover for the building of ships, or any other sort of 
architecture, here are found, in this spot of Neptune, several 
sorts of timber very convenient. The fruits, likewise, which 
here abundantly grow, are nothing inferior, as to their 
quantity or quality, unto what the adjacent islands pro- 
duced. I shall name only some of the most ordinary 
and common. Such are magniot^, potatoes, acajou apples ^ 

* See note 2 on p. 31. 

• Obsolete form of manioc, the cassava plant (genus Manihot) : of. 
Brooke's transl. of Le Blanc's Travels [1660], p. 399 : " Mandioc a root 
is their chief est diet, whereof they make flower [flour]." 

" The cashew-nut tree {anacardium occidentale) . Cf. J. Van 
Linschoten, Voyages [1598]. Bk. ii, p. 251 : " There is an other tree in 



i6 THE ISLAND OF TORTUGA 

yannas^, bacones, paquayes, carosoles, mamayns^, ananas^, 
and diverse other sorts, which, not to be tedious, I omit 
to specify. Here grow likewise in huge number those trees 
called palmettos, or palmites*, whence is drawn a certain 
juice which serves the inhabitants instead of wine, and whose 
leaves do cover their houses instead of tiles. 

In this island abounds also, with daily increase, the wild- 
boar. The Governor has prohibited the hunting of them with 
dogs, fearing lest, the island being but small, the whole race 
of those animals in short time should be destroyed. The 
reason why he thought convenient to preserve those wild- 
beasts was that in case of any invasion of an external enemy 
the inhabitants might sustain themselves with their food, 
especially if they were constrained to retire unto the woods 
and mountains. By this means he judged they were enabled 
to maintain any sudden assault or long persecution. Yet this 
sort of game is almost impeded by itself, by reason of the 
many rocks and precipices, which for the greatest part are 
covered with little shrubs, very green and thick, whence the 
huntsmen have ofttimes precipitated themselves, and left 
us the sad experience and grief of many memorable disasters. 

At a certain time of the year there resort unto this island 
of Tortuga huge flocks of wild-pigeons, at which season 
the inhabitants feed on them very plentifully, having more 
than they can consume, and leaving totally to their repose 
all other sorts of fowl, both wild and tame, to the intent that 
in absence of the pigeons these may supply their place. But 
as nothing in the universe, though never so pleasant, can be 
found but what has something of bitterness joined to it, the 

bignesse like a soiben, the fruit whereof is by them called Aca-iou, of 
forme and greatness like a hennes egge, which being ripe is of a golde 
yellow colour like a quince, very good and savory to eate, having a 
certayne sharpe taste, and in it a juice that cooleth heate." 

1 Yams. SpsiXi. name: other English forms are (i) nname: cf. Men- 
doza. Hist, of China, trans, by Parke [1589], vol. ii, p. 256 of 1854 
edn. : " nnames, patatas, fish, rise, ginger, hennes ; {2) jamb : cf. 
Bosman, Guinea, transl. 1705 : " Their common food is a pot full of 
millet ... or instead of that jambs and potatoes." 

* Mammees {Mammea americana), a large tree of tropical America, 
bearing a large fruit with a yellow pulp of pleasant taste. 

^ Pine-apples. Cf. Hakluyt, Voyages [1600], vol. iii, p. 319: "a 
fruite of great excellencie which they call ananas." According to 
Evelyn's Diary, 19 July, 1661, ananassa saliva was first seen in England 
in 1657. 

* Spanish palmito, the dwarf fan-palm. 



THE FRENCH IN ST CHRISTOPHER 17 

very symbol of this truth we see in the aforesaid pigeons. 
For these, the season being past wherein God has appointed 
them to afford deHcious food unto those people, can scarcely 
be touched with the tongue, they become so extremely lean 
and bitter even to admiration. The reason of this bitterness 
is attributed unto a certain seed which they eat about that 
time, even as bitter as gall. About the sea-shores every- 
where are found great multitudes of crabs belonging both to 
the land and sea, and both sorts very big. These are good to 
feed servants and slaves^, who find them very pleasing to the 
palate, yet withal very hurtful to the sight. Besides which 
symptom, being eaten too often, they also cause great giddi- 
ness in the head, with much weakness of the brain, insomuch 
that very frequently they are deprived of sight for the space 
of one quarter of an hour. 

The French, having established themselves in the isle of 
St Christopher, planted there a sort of trees, of which at 
present there possibly may be greater quantities. With 
the timber of those trees they made long-boats and hoys^ 
which they sent thence westward, being well manned and 
victualled, to discover other islands. These, setting sail from 
St Christopher, came within sight of the island of Hispaniola, 
where at length they arrived with abundance of joy. Having 
landed, they marched into the country, where they found 
huge quantities of cattle, such as cows, bulls, horses, and wild- 
boars. But finding no great profit in those animals unless 
they could enclose them, and knowing likewise the island to 
be pretty well peopled by the Spaniards, they thought it 
convenient to enterprize upon and seize the island of Tortuga. 
This they performed without any difficulty, there being upon 
the island no more than ten or twelve Spaniards to guard it. 
These few men let the French come in peaceably and possess 
the island for the space of six months, without any trouble. 
In the meanwhile they passed and repassed with their canoes 
to Hispaniola, whence they transported many people, and at 
last began to plant the whole isle of Tortuga. The few 

* Some of the land-crabs of the West Indies are to-day regarded as 
delicacies — especially the violet land-crab. 

' Dutch heiide, heu, a small, yet heavy, coasting-vessel for goods or 
passengers, particularly in short distances at the sea-coast. Cf . Hakluyt, 
Voyages, vol, i, p. 160 [1598] : " English pinasses, hoyes, and drum- 
blers." 



1 8 THE FRENCH IN TORTUGA 

Spaniards remaining there, perceiving the French to increase 
their number daily, began at last to repine at their prosperity 
and grudged them the possession they had freely given. 
Hence they gave notice to others of their own nation, their 
neighbours, who sent several great boats, well armed and 
manned, to dispossess the French of that island. This 
expedition succeeded according to their desires. For the 
new possessors, seeing the great number of Spaniards that 
came against them, fled with all they had unto the woods ; 
and hence by night they wafted over with canoes unto the 
isle of Hispaniola. This they more easily performed as having 
no women or children with them, nor any great substance to 
carry away. Here they also retired into the woods, both to 
seek themselves food, and thence with secrecy to give 
intelligence to others of their own faction, as judging for cer- 
tain that within a little while they should be in a capacity 
to hinder the Spaniards from fortifying in Tortuga. 

Meanwhile the Spaniards of the greater island ceased not 
to seek after their new guests, the French, with intent to root 
them out of the woods, if possible, or cause them to perish 
with hunger. But this their design soon failed, having found 
that the French were masters both of good guns, powder, and 
bullets. Here, therefore, the fugitives waited for a certain 
opportunity, wherein they knew the Spaniards were to come 
from Tortuga, with arms and great number of men, to join 
with those of the greater island for their destruction. When 
this occasion proffered, they in the meanwhile deserting the 
woods where they were, returned unto Tortuga, and dis- 
possessed the small number of Spaniards that remained 
at home. Having so done, they fortified themselves as best 
they could, thereby to prevent the return of the Spaniards, 
in case they should attempt it. Moreover, they sent 
immediately unto the Governor of St Christopher, craving 
his aid and relief, and demanding of him to send them a 
Governor, the better to be united among themselves and 
strengthened on all occasions. The Governor of St 
Christopher received their petition with expressions of much 
satisfaction and without any delay sent to them Monsieur le 
Passeur in quality of a Governor, together with a ship full of 
men and all other things necessary both for their establishment 
and defence. No sooner had they received this recruit than 



THE SPANIARDS ATTACK TORTUGA 19 

the Governor commanded a fortress to be built upon the top 
of a high rock, whence he could hinder the access of any ships 
or other vessels that should design to enter the port. Unto 
this fort no other access could be had than by almost climbing 
through a very narrow passage that was capable only of 
receiving two persons at once, and those not without 
difficulty. In the middle of this rock was a great cavity, 
which now serves for a storehouse ; and, besides, here was 
a great convenience for raising a battery. The fort being 
finished, the Governor commanded two guns to be mounted, 
which could not be performed without huge toil and labour, 
as also a house to be built within the fort ; and, afterwards, 
the narrow way that led unto the said fort to be broken and 
demolished, leaving no other ascent thereto than by a ladder. 
Within the fort gushes out a plentiful fountain of fresh water, 
which perpetually runs with a pure and crystalline stream 
sufficient to refresh a garrison of a thousand men. Being 
possessed of these conveniences, and the security these things 
might promise, the French began to people the island, and 
each of them to seek his living, some by the exercise of 
hunting, others by planting tobacco, and others by cruising 
and robbing upon the coasts of the Spanish islands — which 
trade is continued by them to this day. 

The Spaniards, notwithstanding, could not behold but 
with jealous eyes the daily increase of the French in Tortuga, 
fearing lest in time they might by them be dispossessed also 
of Hispaniola. Thus, taking an opportunity when many of 
the French were abroad at sea and others employed in hunting, 
with 800 men in several canoes, they landed again in Tortuga, 
almost without being perceived by the French. But, finding 
that the Governor had cut down many trees, for the better 
discovery of an enemy in case of any assault, as also that 
nothing of consequence could be done without great guns, 
they consulted about the fittest place for raising a battery. 
This place was soon concluded to be the top of a mountain 
which was in sight, seeing that thence alone they could level 
their guns at the fort, which now lay open to them since the 
cutting down of the trees by the new possessors. Hence 
they resolved to open a way for carriage of some pieces of 
ordnance to the top. This mountain is somewhat high, and 
the upper part thereof plain, from whence the whole island 



20 THE SPANIARDS ATTACK TORTUGA 

may be viewed. The sides thereof are very rugged by 
reason of an huge number of inaccessible rocks surrounding it 
everywhere ; so that the ascent was very difficult, and would 
always have been the same, had not the Spaniards undergone 
the immense labour and toil of making the way aforemen- 
tioned, as I shall now relate. 

The Spaniards had in their company many slaves and 
Indians, labouring men, whom they call matates, or, in English, 
half-yellow men. Unto these they gave orders with iron 
tools to dig a way through the rocks. This they performed 
with the greatest speed imaginable. And through this way 
by the help of many ropes and pulleys, they at last made shift 
to get up two sole cannon-pieces, wherewith they made a 
battery, and intended next day to batter the fort. Mean- 
while the French were not ignorant of these designs, but 
rather prepared themselves for a defence (while the Spaniards 
were busied about the battery), sending notice everywhere to 
their companions and requiring their help. Thus the hunters 
of the island all joined together, and with them all the pirates 
who were not already too far from home. These landed by 
night at Tortuga, lest they should be seen by the Spaniards. 
And, under the same obscurity of the night, they all together 
by a back way climbed up the mountain where the Spaniards 
were posted ; which they more easily could perform as being 
acquainted with those rocks. They came thither at the very 
instant that the Spaniards, who were above, were preparing 
to shoot at the fort, not knowing in the least of their coming. 
Here they set upon them, at their backs, with such fury as 
forced the greatest part to precipitate themselves from the 
top to the bottom, and dash their bodies in pieces. Few or 
none escaped this attack, for if any remained alive they were 
all put to the sword, without giving quarter to the meanest. 
Some Spaniards did still keep the bottom of the mountain, 
but, hearing the shrieks and cries of them that were killed and 
believing some tragical revolution to be above, fled immediately 
towards the sea, despairing, through this accident, to ever 
regain the isle of Tortuga. 
^ The Governors of this island did always behave themselves 
as proprietors and absolute lords thereof until the year 1664 ; 
at which time the West India Company of France took 
possession thereof, and sent thither for their Governor 



THE SPANIARDS ATTACK TORTUGA 21 

Monsieur Ogeron. These planted the colony for themselves, 
by the means of their factors and servants, thinking to drive 
some considerable trade thence with the Spaniards, even as 
the Hollanders do from Cura^oa. But this design did not 
answer their expectation. For with other nations they could 
drive no trade, by reason they could not establish any secure 
commerce from the beginning with their own. Forasmuch 
as at the first institution of this Company in France, they 
made an agreement with the pirates, hunters, and planters, 
first possessors of Tortuga, that these should buy all their 
necessaries from the said Company, taking them upon trust. 
And, although this agreement was put in execution, yet the 
factors of the Company soon after found that they could not 
recover either moneys or returns from those people. 
Insomuch as they were constrained to bring some armed 
men into the island, in behalf of the Company, for to get in 
some of their payments. But neither this endeavour nor 
any other could prevail towards settling the secure trade with 
those of the island. And hereupon the Company recalled 
their factors, giving them orders to sell all that was their own 
in the said plantation, both the servants belonging to the 
Company (which were sold, some for 20, others for 30, pieces- 
of-eight)^, as also all other merchandizes and properties which 
they had there. With this resolution all their designs fell to 
the ground. 

In this occasion I was also sold, as being a servant under the 
said Company, in whose service I came out of France./ But 
my fortune was very bad, for I fell into the hands of the most 
cruel tyrant and perfidious man that ever was born of woman, 
who was then Governor, or rather Lieutenant-General, of that 
island. This man treated me with all the hard usages 
imaginable, yea, with that of hunger, with which I thought to 
have perished inevitably. Withal he was willing to let me 
buy my freedom and liberty, but not under the rate of 
300 pieces-of-eight, I not being master of one, at that 
time, in the whole world. At last through the manifold 
miseries I endured, as also affliction of mind, I was thrown 
into a dangerous fit of sickness. This misfortune, being 
added to the rest of my calamities, was the cause of my 
happiness. For my wicked master, seeing my condition, 
began to fear lest he should lose his moneys with my life. 
* See note on p. 60. 



22 THE AUTHOR SOLD INTO SLAVERY 

Hereupon he sold me the second time to a surgeon for the 
price of 70 pieces-of -eight. Being in the hands of this second 
master, I began soon after to recover my health through the 
good usage I had received from him, as being much more 
humane and civil than that of my first patron. He gave me 
both clothes and very good food, and after that I had served 
him but one year he offered me my liberty, with only this 
condition, that I should pay him 100 pieces-of-eight when I 
was in a capacity of wealth so to do.. Which kind proposal 
of his I could not choose but accept with infinite joy and 
gratitude of mind. 

Being now at liberty, though like unto Adam when he was 
first created by the hands of his Maker — that is, naked and 
destitute of all human necessaries, nor knowing how to get 
my living — I determined to enter into the wicked order of the 
Pirates, or Robbers at Sea. Into this Society I was received 
with common consent both of the superior and vulgar sort, 
and among them I continued until the year 1672. Having 
assisted them in all their designs and attempts, and served 
them in many notable exploits, of which hereafter I shall give 
the reader a true account, I returned to my own native country. 
But, before I begin to relate the things above-mentioned, I 
shall say something, for the satisfaction of such as are curious, 
of the island Hispaniola, which lies towards the Western parts 
of America, as also give my reader a brief description thereof, 
according to my slender ability and experience. 





CHAPTER III 

Description of the great and famous island of Hispaniola 

The very large and rich island called Hispaniola lies situate 
in the latitude of seventeen degrees and a half. The greatest 
part thereof extends, from East to West, 20 degrees Southern 
latitude. The circumference is 300 leagues, the length 120, its 
breadth almost 50, being more or less broad or narrow at 
certain places, I shall not need here to insert how this island 
was at first discovered, it being known unto the world that it 
was performed by the means of Christopher Columbus, in the 
year 1492, being sent for this purpose by Ferdinand the 
Catholic, then King of Spain. From which time, to this 
present, the Spaniards have been continually possessors 
thereof. There are upon this island many very good and 

23 



24 THE ISLAND OF HISPANIOLA 

strong cities, towns, and hamlets ; as also it abounds in a great 
number of pleasant and delicious country-houses and planta- 
tions — all which are owing unto the care and industry of the 
Spaniards, its inhabitants. 

The chief city and metropolis of this island is called San 
Domingo, being dedicated to St Dominic, from whom it 
derives this name. It is situated towards the South, in a 
place which affords a most excellent prospect, the country 
round about being embellished with innumerable rich 
plantations, as also verdant meadows and fruitful gardens — 
all which do produce plenty and variety of excellent and 
pleasant fruits, according to the nature of those countries. 
The Governor of the island makes his residence in this city, 
which is, as it were, the storehouse of all the other cities, towns, 
and villages, which hence export and provide themselves with 
all necessaries whatsoever for human life. And yet has it 
this particularity above many other cities in other places, that 
it entertains no external commerce with any other nation 
than its own, the Spaniards. The greatest part of the inhabi- 
tants are rich and substantial merchants, or such as are shop- 
keepers and do sell by retail. 

Another city of this island is named Santiago, or, in English, 
St James, as being consecrated to the Apostle of that name. 
This is an open place, without either walls or castle, situate 
in the latitude of 19 degrees South. The greatest part of the 
inhabitants are hunters and planters, the adjacent territory 
and soil being very proper for the said exercises of its constitu- 
tion. The city is surrounded with large and delicious fields, 
as much pleasing to the view as those of San Domingo ; and 
these abound with all sorts of beasts, both wild and tame, 
whence are taken a huge number of skins and hides, that 
afford unto the owners a very considerable traffic. 

Towards the Southern parts of this island is seen another 
city called Nuestra Seilora del Alta Gracia. The territory 
hereof produces great quantities of cacao, which occasions 
the inhabitants to make great store of the richest sort of 
chocolate. Here grows also much ginger and tobacco ; and 
much tallow is prepared of the beasts which hereabouts are 
hunted. 

^ The inhabitants of this beautiful island of Hispaniola often 
go and come in their canoes to the Isle of Savona, not far 



THE ISLAND OF HISPANIOLA 25 

distant thence, where is their chief fishery, expecially of 
tortoises. Hither those fish constantly resort in huge 
multitudes at certain seasons of the year, there to lay their 
eggs, burying them in the sands of the shore. Thus by the 
heat of the sun, which in those parts is very ardent, they are 
hatched, and continue the propagation of their species. 
This island of Savona has little or nothing that is worthy 
consideration or may merit any particular description, as 
being so extremely barren by reason of its sandy soil. True 
it is that here grows some small quantity of lignum sanctum 
or guaiacum, of whose use we have said something in another 
place. 

Westwards of the city of San Domingo is also situated 
another great village, called by the name of El Pueblo del Aso, 
or the Town of Aso. The inhabitants of this town drive a 
great commerce and traffic with those of another village, 
which is placed in the very middle of the island and is called 
San Juan de Goave, or St John of Goave. This place is 
environed with a magnificent prospect of gardens, woods, and 
meadows. Its territory extends above twenty leagues in 
length, and grazes an huge number of wild bulls and cows. 
In this village scarce dwell any others than hunters and 
butchers, who flay the beasts that are killed. These are for 
the most part a mongrel sort of people of several bloods ; 
some of which are born of white European people and negroes, 
and these are called mulattos. Others are born of Indians 
and white people, and such are termed mestizos'^. But others 
are begotten of negroes and Indians, and these also have their 
peculiar name, being called alcatraces^. Besides which sorts 
of people, there are several other species and races, both here 
and in other places of the West Indies, of whom this account 
may be given, that the Spaniards love better the negro women, 
in those Western parts, or the tawny Indian females, than their 
own white European race, when as peradventure the negroes 

* Cf, Hakluyt, Voyages [1600], vol. iii, p. 482 : " Paul Horsewell is 
married to a Mestisa, as they name those whose fathers were Spaniards, 
and their mothers Indians." 

• A nickname. " The alcatrace is a sea-fowle different to all that I 
have seen, either on the land or in the see. His head is like to the head 
of a gull, but his bill like unto a snytes bill, somewhat shorter and in all 
places alike. . . . He is all blacke of the colour of a crow." — Hawkins, 

Voyage into the South Sea [1593-1622], § xix (p. 153 of the 1878 edition). 



26 THE ISLAND OF HISPANIOLA 

and Indians have greater inclinations to the white women, or 
those that come near them, the tawny, than their own. From 
the said village are exported yearly vast quantities of tallow 
and hides, they exercising no other traffic nor toil. For, as 
to the lands in this place, they are not cultivated, by reason of 
the excessive dryness of the soil. ^These are the chiefest places 
that the Spaniards possess in this island, from the Cape of 
Lobos towards St John de Goave unto the Cape of Samana, 
nigh the sea, on the North side, and from the Eastern part 
towards the sea, called Punta d'Espada. All the rest of the 
island is possessed by the French, who are also planters and 
hunters/ 

This island has very good ports for ships, from the Cape of 
Lobos to the Cape of Tiburon, which lies on the Western side 
thereof. In this space of land there are no less than four ports, 
which exceed in goodness, largeness, and security even the 
very best of England. Besides these, from the Cape of 
Tiburon unto the Cape of Donna Maria, there are two very 
excellent ports, and from this Cape to the Cape of St 
Nicholas there are no less than twelve others. Every one of 
these ports has also the confluence of two or three good rivers, 
in which are found several sorts of fish, very pleasing to the 
palate and also in great plenty. The country hereabouts is 
sufficiently watered with large and profound rivers and brooks 
so that this part of the land may easily be cultivated without 
any great fear of droughts, it being certain that better streams 
are not to be found in any part of the world. The sea-coasts 
and shores are also very pleasant, unto which the tortoises 
resort in huge numbers, there to lay their eggs. 

This island was formerly very well peopled on the North 
side thereof with many towns and villages ; but these, being 
ruined by the Hollanders, were at last for the greatest part 
deserted by the Spaniards. 



CHAPTER IV 

Of the Fruits, Trees, and Animals that are found at Hispaniola 

The spacious fields of this island do commonly extend them- 
s:5lves to the length of five or six leagues, the beauty whereof 
is so pleasing to the eye that, together with the great variety 
of their natural productions, they infinitely applaud and 
captivate the senses of the contemplator. For here at once 
they not only, with diversity of objects, recreate the sight, 
but, with many of the same, also do please the smell, and, with 
most, contribute abundance of delights to the taste. With 
sundry diversities also they flatter and excite the appetite ; 
but more especially with the multitude of oranges and lemons, 
here growing both sweet and sour, and those that participate 
of both tastes and are only pleasantly tart. Besides which, 
here abundantly grow several other sorts of the same fruit, 
such as are called citrons, toronjas, and limes, in English not 
improperly called crab-lemons. True it is that, as to the 
lemons, they exceed not here the bigness of a hen's egg, 
which smallness distinguishes them from those of Spain most 
frequently used in these our Northern countries. The date- 
trees, which here are seen to cover the whole extent of very 
spacious plains, are exceedingly tall in their proportion, which 
notwithstanding does not offend but rather delight the view. 
Their height is observed to be from 150 to 200 feet, being 
wholly destitute of branches unto the very tops. Here it is 
there grows a certain pleasant white substance not unlike 
unto that of white cabbage, whence the branches and leaves do 
sprout, and in which also the seed or dates are contained. 
Every month one of those branches falls to the ground, and 
at the same time another sprouts out. But the seed ripens 
not but once in the year. The dates are food extremely 
coveted by the hedgehogs. The white substance growing 

27 



28 TREES OF HISPANIOLA 

at the top of the tree is used by the Spaniards after the same 
manner for common sustenance as cabbage in Europe, they 
cutting it into sHces, and boiUng it in their ollas^, with all sorts 
of meat. The leaves of this sort of date-tree are seven or 
eight foot in length and three or four in breadth, being very 
fit to cover houses with. For they defend from rain equally 
with the best tiles, though never so rudely huddled together. 
They make use of them also to wrap up smoked flesh with, 
and to make a certain sort of buckets wherewith to carry 
water, though no longer durable than the space of six, seven, 
or eight days. The cabbages of these trees, for so we may 
call them, are of a greenish colour on the outside, though 
inwardly very white, whence may be separated a sort of rind, 
which is very like unto parchment, being fit to write upon as 
we do upon paper. The bodies of these trees are of an huge 
bulk or thickness, which two men can hardly compass with their 
arms. And yet they cannot properly be termed woody, but 
only three or four inches deep in thickness, all the rest of the 
internal part being very soft, insomuch that, paring off those 
three or four inches of woody substance, the remaining part of 
the body may be sliced hke new cheese. They wound them three 
or four foot above the root, and, making an incision or broach 
in the body, thence gently distils a sort of liquor, which in 
short time by fermentation becomes as strong as the richest 
wine, and which does easily inebriate if not used with modera- 
tion. The French call this sort of palm-trees ' frank-palms,' 
and they only grow, both here and elsewhere, in saltish 
grounds. 

Besides these palm-trees of which we have made mention, 
there are also in Hispaniola four other species of palms, which 
are distinguished by the names of latanier, palma espinosa or 
prickle-palm, palma a chapelet or rosary-palm, palma vinosa 
or wine-palm. The latanier-palm is not so tall as the wine- 
palm, although it has almost the same shape, only that the 
leaves are very like unto the fans our women use. They grow 
mostly in gravelly and sandy ground, their circumference being 
of seven foot more or less. The body has many prickles or 

^ A Spanish word, meaning a round earthen pot, a dish compounded 
of various kinds of meat and vegetables. Cf. Howell, Letters [1630], V, 
38 : " He can marinat [marinade = pickle] fish, make gellies . . . besides, 
he is passing good for an ollia." 



k 



I 



TREES OF HISPANIOLA 29 

thorns of the length of half a foot, very sharp and pungent. 
It produces its seed after the same manner as that above- 
mentioned, which likewise serves for food unto the wild beasts. 

Another sort of these palm-trees is called prickle-palm, 
as we said before, by reason it is infinitely full of prickles, 
from the root to the very leaves thereof, much more than the 
precedent. With these prickles some of the barbarous 
Indians use to torment their prisoners of war whom they take 
in battle. They tie them to a tree, and then, taking these 
thorns, they put them into little pellets of cotton, which they 
dip in oil, and thus stick them in the sides of the miserable 
prisoners, as thick as the bristles of a hedgehog ; which 
of necessity cause an incredible torment to the patient. 
Afterwards they set them on fire, and, if the tormented 
prisoner sings in the midst of his torments and flames, he is 
esteemed as a valiant and courageous soldier who neither fears 
his enemies nor their torments. But if, on the contrary he 
cries out, they esteem him but as a poltroon or coward and 
unworthy of any memory. This custom was told me by an 
Indian, who said he had used his enemies thus oftentimes. 
The Hke cruelties to these many Christians have seen while 
they lived among those barbarians. But returning unto the 
prickle-palm, I shall only tell you that this palm-tree is in 
this only different from the latanier, that the leaves are like 
unto those of the frank-palm. Its seed is like unto that of 
the other palm-trees, being only much bigger and rounder, 
almost as a farthing, and inwardly full of little kernels, which 
are as pleasing to the taste as our walnuts in Europe. This 
tree grows for the most part in the marshes and low grounds 
of the sea-coast. 

The wine-palm is so called from the abundance of wine 
which is gathered from it. This palm grows in high and rocky 
mountains, not exceeding in tallness the height of 40 or 50 
foot, but yet of an extraordinary shape or form. For, from 
the root unto the half of its proportion, it is only three or four 
inches thick. But, upwards, something above the two-thirds 
of its height, it is as big and as thick as an ordinary bucket or 
milk-pail. Within, it is full of a certain matter very like unto 
the tender stalk of a white cabbage, which is very juicy of a 
liquor that is much pleasing to the palate. This liquor after 
fermentation and settling of the grounds reduces itself into 



30 TREES OF HISPANIOLA 

a very good and clear wine, which is purchased^ with no great 
industry. For, having wounded the tree with an ordinary 
hatchet, they make a square incision or orifice in it, through 
which they bruise the said matter until it be capable of being 
squeezed out, or expressed with the hands, they needing no 
other instrument than this. With the leaves they make 
certain vessels, not only to settle and purify the afore- 
mentioned liquor, but also to drink in. It bears its fruit like 
other palms, but of a very small shape, being not unlike 
cherries. The taste hereof is very good, but of dangerous 
consequence unto the throat, where it causes huge and extreme 
pains, that produce malignant quinsies in them that eat it. 

The palma d, chapelet, or rosary-palm, was thus called both 
by the French and Spaniards because its seed is very fit to 
make rosaries or beads to say prayers upon, the beads being 
small, hard, and capable of being easily bored for that use. 
This fourth species grows on the tops of the highest mountains, 
and is of an excessive tallness, but withal very straight and 
adorned with very few leaves. 

Here grows also in this island a certain sort of apricot-trees, 
whose fruit equals in bigness that of our ordinary melons. 
The colour is like unto ashes, and the taste the very same as 
that of our apricots in Europe, the inward stones of this fruit 
being of the bigness of a hen's Q,gg. On these the wild-boars 
feed very deliciously, and fatten even to admiration. 

The trees called caremites are very like unto our pear-trees, 
whose fruits resemble much our Damascene plums or 
pruants^ of Europe, being of a very pleasant and agreeable 
taste and almost as sweet as milk. This fruit is black on the 
inside, and the kernels thereof, sometimes only two in number, 
sometimes three, others five, of the bigness of a lupin. This 
plum affords no less pleasant food to the wild-boars than the 
apricots above-mentioned, only that it is not so commonly to 
be found upon the island, nor in such quantity as those are. 

The genipa-trees are seen everywhere all over this island, 
being very like unto our cherry-trees, although its branches 
are more dilated. The fruit hereof is of an ash-colour, of 
the bigness of two fists, which interiorly is full of many 

* See note on p. 67. 

2 Prunes : cf. Elyot. Castel of Helthe [1533], Bk. ii, p. 27 : " The 
damask prune rather bindeth than lowseth, and is more commodious 
vnto the stomake." 



TREES OF HISPANIOLA 31 

prickles or points that are involved under a thin membrane 
or skin, the which, if not taken away at the time of eating, 
causes great obstructions and gripings of the belly. Before 
this fruit grows ripe, if pressed, it affords a juice as black as 
ink, being fit to write withal upon paper. But the letters 
disappear within the space of nine days, the paper remaining 
as white as if it never had been written upon. The wood of 
this tree is very strong, solid, and hard, good to build ships 
withal, seeing it is observed to last many years in the water 
without putrefaction. 

Besides these, divers other sorts of trees are natives of this 
delicious island, that produce very excellent and pleasant 
fruits. Of these I shall omit to name several, knowing there 
are entire volumes of learned authors that have both described 
and searched them with greater attention and curiosity than 
my own. Notwithstanding, I shall continue to make mention 
of some few more in particular. Such are the cedars, which 
trees this part of the world produces in prodigious quantity. 
The French nation calls them acajou^ ; and they find them 
very useful for the building of ships and canoes. These 
canoes are like little wherry-boats, being made of one tree 
only, excavated, and fitted for the sea. They are withal so 
swift as for that very property they may be called ' Neptune's 
post-horses*. The Indians make these canoes without the 
use of any iron instruments, by only burning the trees at the 
bottom nigh the root, and afterwards governing the fire with 
such industry as nothing is burnt more than what they would 
have. Some of them have hatchets made of flint, wherewith 
they scrape, or pare off, whatsoever was burnt too far. And 
thus, by the sole instrument of fire, they know how to give 
them that shape which renders them capable of navigating 
threescore or fourscore leagues with ordinary security. 

As to medicinal productions, here is to be found the tree 
that affords the gum elemi used in our apothecaries' shops. 
Likewise guaiacum, or lignum sanctum ; lignum aloes, or aloe- 
wood ; cassia lignea ; China-roots^ ; with several others. The 

* The French acajou is mahogany — loosely used here for cedar. 

» The name of the tuber of various species of smilax, allied to 
sarsaparilla, at one time used to relieve gout and to purify the blood. 
Cf. " The tree likewise that affords Gutntni Elemi grows here in great 
abundance ; as doth Radix Chines, or China-root." — Description of the 
Isthmus of Darien [1699], p. 4. 



32 TREES OF HISPANIOLA 

tree called mapou, besides that it is medicinal, is also used for 
making of canoes, as being very thick ; yet is it much inferior 
to the acajou or cedar, as being somewhat spongy, whereby it 
sucks in much water, which renders it dangerous in navigation. 
The tree called acoma has its wood very hard and heavy, of 
the colour of palm. These qualities render it very fit to make 
oars for the sugar-mills. Here are also in great quantities 
hrasileie, or brazil-wood, and that which the Spaniards call 
mariQanilla. 

Brazil-wood is now very well known in the provinces of 
Holland and the Low Countries. By another name it is called 
by the Spaniards lenna de peje palo. It serves only, or chiefly, 
for dyeing and what belongs to that trade. It grows abun- 
dantly along the sea-coasts of this island, especially in two 
places called Jacmel and Jaquina. These are two com- 
modious ports or bays, capable of receiving ships of the 
greatest bulk. 

The tree called mafiQanilla, or dwarf apple-tree, grows 
nigh unto the sea-shore, being naturally so low that its 
branches, though never so short, always touch the water. 
It bears a fruit something like unto our sweet-scented apples 
which, notwithstanding, is of a very venomous quality. For, 
these apples being eaten by any person, he instantly changes 
colour, and such an huge thirst seizes him as all the water of 
the Thames cannot extinguish, he dying raving mad within a 
little while after. But, what is more, the fish that eat, as it 
often happens, of this fruit are also poisonous. This tree 
affords also a liquor, both thick and white, like unto the fig-tree, 
which, if touched by the hand, raises bhsters upon the skin, 
and these are so red in colour as if it had been deeply scalded 
with hot water. One day being hugely tormented with 
mosquitos, or gnats, and as yet unacquainted with the nature 
of this tree, I cut a branch thereof, to serve me instead of a 
fan, but all my face swelled the next day and filled with 
bhsters, as if it were burnt to such a degree that I was blind 
for three days. 

Ycao is the name of another sort of tree, so called by the 
Spaniards, which grows by the sides of rivers. This bears 
a certain fruit, not unhke unto our bullace or damson-plums. 
And this food is extremely coveted by the wild-boar, when at 
its perfect maturity ; with which they fatten as much as our 



TREES OF HISPANIOLA 33 

hogs with the sweetest acorns of Spain. These trees love 
sandy ground, yet are so low that, their branches being very 
large, they take up a great circumference, almost couched 
upon the ground. The trees named abelcoses bear fruit of 
like colour with the ycaos above-mentioned, but of the bigness 
of melons, the seeds or kernels being as big as eggs. The 
substance of this fruit is yellow, and of a pleasant taste ; 
which the poorest among the French do eat instead of bread, 
the wild-boar not caring at all for this fruit. These trees 
grow very tall and thick, being somewhat like unto our 
largest sort of pear-trees. 

As to the insects which this island produces, I shall only 
take notice of three sorts of flies, which excessively torment 
ay human bodies, but more especially such as never before, 
or but a little while, were acquainted with these countries. 
The first sort of these flies is as big as our common horse-flies 
in Europe. And these, darting themselves upon men's bodies, 
there stick and suck their blood till they can no longer fly. 
Their importunity obliges to make almost continual use of 
branches of trees wherewith to fan them away. The Spaniards 
in those parts call them mosquitos^ or gnats, but the French 
give them the name of maranguines. The second sort of these 
insects is no bigger than a grain of sand. These make no 
buzzing noise, as the preceding species does, for which reason it 
is less avoidable, as being able also through its smallness to 
penetrate the finest linen or cloth. The hunters are forced to 
anoint their faces with hog's-grease, thereby to defend them- 
selves from the stings of these little animals. By night, in 
their huts or cottages, they constantly for the same purpose 
burn the leaves of tobacco, without which smoke they were not 
able to rest. True it is that in the daytime they are not very 
troublesome, in case any wind be stirring, for this, though 
never so little, causes them to dissipate. The gnats of the 
third species exceed not the bigness of a grain of mustard. 
The colour is red*. These sting not at all, but do bite so 
sharply upon the flesh as to create little ulcers therein. 
Whence it often comes that the face swells and is rendered 
hideous to the view, through this inconvenience. These are 

* Bosman, in his Guinea [transl. 1705], refers to " the innumerable 
millions of gnats, which the Portuguese call musquito's " — Letter xxi. 

* The bete rouge, to this day a pest in the West Indies. 



34 INSECTS OF HISPANIOLA 

chiefly troublesome by day, even from the beginning of the 
morning until sun-setting, after which time they take up 
their rest, and permit human bodies to do the same. The 
Spaniards gave these insects the name of rojados, and the 
French that of calarodes. 

The insects which the Spaniards call cochinillas, and the 
English glow-worms, are also to be found in these parts. 
These are very like unto such as we have in Europe, unless 
that they are somewhat bigger and longer than ours. They 
have two little specks on their heads, which by night give so 
much light that three or four of those animals, being together 
upon a tree, it is not discernible at a distance from a bright 
shining fire. I had on a certain time at once three of these 
cochinillas in my cottage, which there continued until past 
midnight, shining so brightly that without any other light 'I 
could easily read in any book, although of never so small a 
print. I attempted to bring some of these insects into Europe 
when I came from those parts, but as soon as they came into 
a colder climate they died by the way. They lost also their 
shining upon the change of air, even before their death. 
This shining is so great, according to what I have related, that 
the Spaniards with great reason may well call them from their 
luminous quality moscas de fuego, that is to say fire-flies. 

There be also in Hispaniola an excessive number of grillones 
or crickets. These are of an extraordinary magnitude, if 
compared to ours, and so full of noise that they are ready to 
burst themselves with singing, if any person comes near them. 
Here is no lesser number of reptiles, such as serpents are and 
others, but by a particular providence of the Creator these 
have no poison. Neither do they any other harm than unto 
what fowl they can catch, but more especially unto pullets, 
pigeons, and others of this kind. Ofttimes these serpents or 
snakes are useful in houses to cleanse them of rats and mice. 
For with great cunning they counterfeit their shrieks, and 
hereby both deceive and catch them at their pleasure. Hav- 
ing taken them, they in no wise eat the guts of these vermin, 
but only suck their blood at first. Afterwards throwing away 
the guts, they swallow almost entire the rest of the body, 
which, as it should seem, they readily digest into soft excre- 
ments, of which they discharge their bellies. Another sort of 
reptiles belonging to this island is called by the name of 



REPTILES; SPIDERS; SCORPIONS 35 

tcoQodores de tnoscas, or fly-catchers. This name was given unto 
this reptile by the Spaniards, by reason they never could 
experience it lived upon any other food than flies. Hence it 
cannot be said this creature causes any harm unto the inhabit- 
ants, but rather benefit, seeing it consumes by its continual 
exercise of hunting the vexatious and troublesome flies. 
Land-tortoises here be also in great quantities. They 
mostly breed in mud and fields that are overflown with water. 
The inhabitants eat them, and testify they are very good food. 
But a sort of spider which is here found is very hideous. These 
are as big as an ordinary egg, and their feet as long as those of 
the biggest sea-crabs. Withal, they are very hairy, and have 
four black teeth, like unto those of a rabbit, both in bigness 
d shape. Notwithstanding, their bitings are not venomous, 
though they can bite very sharply, and do use it very com- 
only. They breed for the most part in the roofs of houses. 
This island also is not free from the insect called in Latin 
millepes, and in Greek scolopendria, or ' many-feet ' : neither 
is it void of scorpions. Yet, by the providence of nature, 
neither the one nor the other bears the least suspicion of 
poison. For, although they cease not to bite, yet their 
wounds require not the appHcation of any medicament for 
their cure. And, although their bitings cause some inflam- 
mation and swelling at the beginning, however these symptoms 
disappear of their own accord. Thus in the whole circum- 
ference of Hispaniola, no animal is found that produces the 
least harm with its venom. 

After the insects above-mentioned, I shall not omit to say 
something of that terrible beast called cayman. This is a 
certain species of crocodile, wherewith this island very plenti- 
fully abounds. Among these caymans some are found to be 
of a corpulency very horrible to the sight. Certain it is, that 
such have been seen as had no less than three-score-and-ten 
foot in length and twelve in breadth. Yet more marvellous 
than their bulk is their cunning and subtlety wherewith they 
purchase their food. Being hungry, they place themselves 
nigh the sides of rivers, more especially at the fords, where 
cattle come to drink or wade over. Here they lie without any 
motion, nor stirring any part of their body, resembling an old 
tree fallen into the river, only floating upon the waters, whither 
these will carry them. Yet they recede not far from the bank- 



36 CROCODILES OF HISPANIOLA 

sides, but continually lurk in the same place, waiting till some 
wild-boar or salvage cow comes to drink or refresh themselves 
at that place. At which point of time, with huge activity, 
they assault them, and seizing on them with no less fierceness, 
they drag the prey into the water and there stifle it. But 
what is more worthy admiration is, that three or four days 
before the caymans go upon this design, they eat nothing at all. 
But, diving into the river, they swallow one or two hundred- 
weight of stones, such as they can find. With these they 
render themselves more heavy than before, and make addition 
to their natural strength (which in this animal is very great), 
thereby to render their assault the more terrible and secure. 
The prey being thus stifled, they suffer it to lie four or five 
days underwater untouched ; for they could not eat the least 
bit thereof, unless half-rotten. But, when it is arrived at such 
a degree of putrefaction as is most pleasing to their palate, 
they devour it with great appetite and voracity. If they can lay 
hold on any hides of beasts, such as the inhabitants ofttimes 
place in the fields for drying against the sun, they drag them 
into the water. Here they leave them for some days, well 
loaden with stones, till the hair falls off. Then they eat them 
with no less appetite than they would the animals themselves, 
could they catch them. I have seen myself, many times, like 
things unto these I have related. But, besides my own 
experience, many writers of natural things have made entire 
treatises of these animals, describing not only their shape, 
magnitude, and other qualities, but also their voracity and 
brutish inclinations ; which, as I have told you, are very 
strange. A certain person of good reputation and credit told 
me that one day he was by the river-side washing his baraca, 
or tent, wherein he used to lie in the fields. As soon as he 
began his work, a cayman fastened upon the tent, and with 
incredible fury dragged it under water. The man, desirous 
to see if he could save his tent, pulled on the contrary side with 
all his strength, having in his mouth a butcher's knife (where- 
with as it happened he was scraping the canvas) to defend 
himself in case of urgent necessity. The cayman, being angry 
at this opposition, vaulted upon his body, out of the river, 
and drew him with great celerity into the water, endeavouring 
with the weight of his bulk to stifle him under the banks. Thus 
finding himself in the greatest extremity, almost crushed to 



CROCODILES OF HISPANIOLA 37 

death by that huge and formidable animal, with his knife he 
gave the cayman several wounds in the belly, wherewith he 
suddenly expired. Being thus delivered from the hands of 
imminent fate, he drew the cayman out of the water, and 
with the same knife opened the body, to satisfy his own 
curiosity. In his stomach he found nearly one hundred- 
weight of stones, each of them being almost of the bigness 
of his fist. 

The caymans are ordinarily busied in hunting and catching 
of flies, which they eagerly devour. The occasion is, because 
close unto their skin they have certain little scales which smell 
with a sweet scent, something like unto musk. This aromatic 
odour is coveted by the flies, and here they come to repose 
themselves and sting. Thus they both persecute each other 
continually, with an incredible hatred and antipathy. Their 
manner of procreating and hatching their young ones is as 
follows. They approach the sandy banks of some river that 
lies exposed to the rays of the south sun. Among these sands 
they lay their eggs, which afterwards they cover with their 
feet ; and here they find them hatched, and with young genera- 
tion, by only the heat of the sun. These, as soon as they are 
out of the shell, by natural instinct run unto the water. 
Many times those eggs are destroyed by birds that find them 
out, as they scrape among the sands. Hereupon the females 
of the caymans, at such times as they fear the coming of any 
flocks of birds, do ofttimes by night swallow these their eggs, 
and keep them in their stomach till the danger is over. And, 
from time to time, they bury them again in the sand, as I have 
told you, bringing them forth again out of their belly till the 
season is come of being excluded the shell. At this time, if 
the mother be nigh at hand, they run unto her and play with 
her as little whelps would do with their dams, sporting them- 
selves according to their own custom. In this sort of sport 
they will oftentimes run in and out of their mother's belly, 
even as rabbits into their holes. This I have seen them do 
many times, as I have spied them at play with their dam over 
the water upon the contrary banks of some river. At which 
time I have often disturbed their sport by throwing a stone 
that way, causing them on a sudden to creep into the mother's 
bowels, for fear of some imminent danger. The manner of 
procreating of those p,nimals is always the same as I have re- 



38 CROCODILES OF HISPANIOLA 

lated, and at the same time of the year, for they neither meddle 
nor mate with one another but in the month of May. They 
give them in this country the name of crocodiles, though in 
other places of the West Indies they go under the name of 
caymans. 



CHAPTER V 

Of all sorts of quadruped animals and birds that are found in 
this island. As also a relation of the French Buccaneers 

Besides the fruits which this island produces, whose plenty, 
as is held for certain, surpasses all the islands of America, it 
abounds also very plentifully in all sorts of quadruped animals, 
such as horses, bulls, cows, wild-boars, and others very useful 
to human kind, not only for common sustenance of life, but 
also for cultivating the ground and the management of a 
sufficient commerce. 

In this island, therefore, are still remaining an huge number 
of wild-dogs. These destroy yearly multitudes of all sorts of 
cattle. For no sooner has a cow brought forth her calf, or a 
mare foaled, but these wild-mastiffs come to devour the young 
breed, if they find not some resistance from keepers and other 
domestic dogs. They run up and down the woods and fields 
commonly in whole troops of fifty, three-score, or more to- 
gether, being withal so fierce that they ofttimes will assault an 
entire herd of wild-boars, not ceasing to persecute them till 
they have at last overcome and torn in pieces two or three. 
One day a French Buccaneer caused me to see a strange action 
of this kind. Being in the fields hunting together, we heard 
a great noise of dogs, which had surrounded a wild-boar. 
Having tame dogs with us, we left them to the custody of our 
servants, desirous to see the sport, if possible. Hence my 
companion and I, each of us, climbed up into several trees, 
both for security and prospect. The wild-boar was all alone, 
and standing against a tree ; with his tusks he endeavoured to 
defend himself from a great number of dogs that had enclosed 
him, having with his teeth killed and wounded several of them. 
This bloody fight continued about an hour, the wild-boar 
meanwhile attempting many times to escape. At last, being 

39 



40 WILD-DOGS OF HISPANIOLA 

upon the flight, one of those dogs, leaping on his back, fastened 
upon the testicles, which at one pull he tore in pieces. The rest 
of the dogs, perceiving the courage of their companion, fast- 
ened likewise upon the boar, and presently after killed him. 
This being done, all of them, the first only excepted, laid them- 
selves down upon the ground about the prey, and there 
peaceably continued till he, the first and most courageous of 
the troop, had eaten as much as he could devour. When this 
dog had ended his repast and left the dead beast, all the rest fell 
in to take their share, till nothing was left that they could 
devour. What ought we to infer from this notable action, 
performed by the brutish sense of wild animals ? Only this, 
that even beasts themselves are not destitute of knowledge, 
and that they give us documents how to honour such as have 
well deserved, seeing these, being irrational animals as they 
were, did reverence and respect him that exposed his life to 
the greatest danger, in vanquishing courageously the common 
enemy. 

The Governor of Tortuga, Monsieur Ogeron, understanding 
that the wild-dogs killed too many of the wild-boars, and that 
the hunters of that island had much-a-do to find any, fearing 
lest that common sustenance of the isle should fail, caused a 
great quantity of poison to be brought from France, therewith 
to destroy the wild-mastiffs. This was performed in the year 
1668, by commanding certain horses to be killed and en- 
venomed, and laid open in the woods and fields, at certain 
places where mostly wild-dogs used to resort. This being 
continued for the space of six months, there were killed an 
incredible number in the said time. And yet all this industry 
was not sufficient to exterminate and destroy the race ; yea, 
scarce to make any diminution thereof, their number appear- 
ing to be almost as entire as before. These wild-dogs are 
easily rendered tame among people, even as tame as the 
ordinary dogs we breed in houses. Moreover, the hunters of 
those parts, whensoever they find a wild bitch with young 
whelps, do commonly take away the puppies and bring them 
to their houses, where they experience them, being grown up, 
to hunt much better than other dogs. 

'But here the curious reader may peradventure inquire 
whence or by what accident came so many wild dogs into those 
islands. The occasion was that the Spaniards, having pos- 



WILD-DOGS OF HISPANIOLA 41 

sessed themselves of these isles, found them much peopled 
with Indians. These were a barbarous sort of people totally 
given to sensuality and a brutish custom of life, hating all 
manner of labour, and only inclined to run from place to place, 
killing and making war against their neighbours, not out of 
any ambition to reign, but only because they agreed not with 
themselves in some common terms of language. Hence 
perceiving the dominion of the Spaniards laid a great restric- 
tion upon their lazy and brutish customs, they conceived 
an incredible odium against them, such as never was to be 
reconciUid. But more especially, because they saw them take 
possession of their kingdoms and dominions. Hereupon 
they made against them all the resistance they were capable 
of, opposing everywhere their designs to the utmost of their 
power, until that the Spaniards, finding themselves to be 
cruelly hated by those Indians, and nowhere secure from their 
treacheries, resolved to extirpate and ruin them every one ; 
especially seeing they could neither tame them by the civilities 
of their customs, nor conquer them by the sword. But the 
Indians, it being their ancient custom to make their woods 
their chieftest places of defence, at present made these 
their refuge whenever they fled from the Spaniards that 
pursued them. Hereupon those first conquerors of the New 
World made use of dogs to range and search the intricatest 
thickets of woods and forests for those their implacable and 
unconquerable enemies. By these means they forced them 
to leave their ancient refuge and submit unto the sword, 
seeing no milder usage would serve turn. Hereupon they 
killed some of them, and, quartering their bodies, placed them 
in the highways, to the intent that others might take warning 
from such a punishrhent, not to incur the like danger. But 
this severity proved to be of ill consequence. For, instead 
of frighting them and reducing their minds to a civil society, 
they conceived such horror of the Spaniards and their pro- 
ceedings, that they resolved to detest and fly their sight for 
ever. And hence the greatest part died in caves and 
subterraneous places of the woods and mountains ; in which 
places I myself have seen many times great numbers of human 
bones./ The Spaniards afterwards, finding no more Indians 
to appear about the woods, endeavoured to rid themselves of 
the great number of dogs they had in their houses, whence 



42 WILD-BULLS OF HISPANIOLA 

these animals, finding no masters to keep them, betook 
themselves unto the woods and fields, there to hunt for food 
to preserve their lives. Thus by degrees they became un- 
acquainted with the houses of their ancient masters, and at 
last grew wild. This is the truest account I can give of the 
multitudes of wild-dogs which are seen to this day in these 
parts. 

But besides the wild-mastiffs above-mentioned, here are 
also huge numbers of wild-horses to be seen everywhere. 
These run up and down in whole herds or flocks all over the 
island of Hispaniola. They are but low of stature, short- 
bodied, with great heads, long necks, and big or thick legs. 
In a word, they have nothing that is handsome in all their 
shape. They are seen to run up and down commonly in troops 
of two or three hundred together, one of them going always 
before, to lead the multitude. When they meet any person 
that travels through the woods or fields, they stand still, 
suffering him to approach till he can almost touch them, and 
then, suddenly starting, they betake themselves to flight, 
running away disorderly, as fast as they are able. The 
hunters catch them with industry, only for the benefit of their 
skins, although sometimes they preserve their flesh likewise, 
which they harden with smoke, using it for provisions when 
they go to sea. 

Here would be also wild-bulls and cows, in greater number 
than at present, if by continuation of hunting their race were 
not much diminished. Yet considerable profit is made even to 
this day by such as make it their business to kill them. The 
wild-bulls are of a vast corpulency, or bigness of body ; and 
yet they do no hurt unto any person if they be not exasperated 
but left to their own repose. The hides which are taken from 
them are from eleven to thirteen foot long. 

The diversity of birds inhabiting the air of this island is so 
great that I should be troublesome, as well unto the reader as 
myself, if I should attempt to muster up their species. Hence, 
leaving aside the prolix catalogue of their multitude, I shall 
content myself only to mention some few of the chief est. Here 
is a certain species of pullets in the woods, which the Spaniards 
call by the name of pintadas, which the inhabitants find with- 
out any distinction to be as good as those which are bred in 
houses. It is already known to everybody that the parrots 



BIRDS OF HISPANIOLA 43 

which we have in Europe are transported to us from these 
parts of the world. Whence may be inferred that, seeing such 
a number of these talkative birds are preserved among us, 
notwithstanding the diversity of climates, much greater 
multitudes are to be found where the air and temperament is 
natural to them. The parrots make their nests in holes of 
palmetto-trees, which holes are before made to their hand by 
other birds. The reason is, forasmuch as they are not capable 
of excavating any wood though never so soft, as having their 
own bills too crooked and blunt. Hence provident nature 
has supplied them with the labour and industry of another 
sort of small birds called carpinieros, or carpenters. These 
are no bigger than sparrows, yet notwithstanding of such hard 
and piercing bills that no iron instrument can be made more 
apt to excavate any tree, though never so solid and hard. In 
the holes, therefore, fabricated beforehand by these birds, the 
parrots get possession, and build their nests, as has been said. 
Pigeons of all sorts are also here abundantly provided unto 
the inhabitants by Him that created in the beginning and 
provided all things. For eating of them, those of this island 
observe the same seasons as we said before, speaking of the isle 
of Tortuga. Betwixt the pigeons of both islands little or no 
difference is observable, only that these of Hispaniola are 
something fatter and bigger than those. Another sort of 
small birds here are called cabreros, or goat-keepers. These 
are very like unto others called heronsetas, and do chiefly feed 
upon crabs of the sea. In these birds are found seven distinct 
bladders of gall, and hence their flesh is as bitter unto the 
taste as aloes. Crows or ravens, more troublesome unto the 
inhabitants than useful, do here make a hideous noise through 
the whole circumference of the island. Their ordinary food is 
the flesh of wild-dogs, or the carcases of those beasts the 
Buccaneers kill and throw away. These clamorous birds do 
no sooner hear the report of a fowling-piece or musket but they 
gather from all sides into whole flocks, and fill the air and woods 
with their unpleasant notes. They are in nothing different 
from those we see in Europe. 

/ It is now high time to speak of the French nation, who 
inhabit a great part of this island. We have told, at the 
beginning of this book, after what manner they came at first 
into these parts. At present, therefore, we shall only describe 



44 HUNTERS 

their manner of living, customs, and ordinary employments. 
The different callings or professions they follow are generally 
but three : either to hunt, or plant, or else to rove on the sea 
in quahty of pirates. It is a general and solemn custom 
amongst them all to seek out for a comrade or companion, 
whom we may call partner, in their fortunes ; with whom they 
join the whole stock of what they possess, towards a mutual 
and reciprocal gain. This is done also by articles drawn and 
signed on both sides, according to what has been agreed be- 
tween them. Some of these constitute their surviving com- 
panion absolute heir unto what is left by the death of the first 
of the two. Others, if they be married, leave their estates 
unto their wives and children ; others unto other relations. 
This being done, every one applies himself unto his calling, 
which is always one of the three aforementioned. 

The hunters are again subdivided into two several sorts. 
For some of these are given to hunt only wild-bulls and cows ; 
others hunt only wild-boars. The first of these two sorts of 
hunters are called Buccaneers^ These not long ago were 
about the number of 600 upon this island ; but at present 
there are not reckoned to be above 300 more or less. The 
cause has been the great decrease of wild-cattle through the 
dominions of the French in Hispaniola, which has appeared to 
be so notable that, far from getting any considerable gain, 
they at present are but poor in this exercise. Avhen the 
Buccaneers go into the woods to hunt for wild-bulls and cows, 
they commonly remain there the space of a whole twelve- 
month or two years, without returning home. After the 
hunt is over and the spoil divided among them, they 
commonly sail to the isle of Tortuga, there to provide 
themselves with guns, powder, bullets, and small shot, with all 
other necessaries against another going out or hunting. The 
rest of their gains they spend with great liberality, giving 
themselves freely to all manner of vices and debauchery, > 
among which the first is that of drunkenness, which they 
exercise for the most part with brandy ; this they drink as 
liberally as the Spaniards do clear fountain-water. Sometimes 
they buy together a pipe of wine : this they stave at the one 
end, and never cease drinking till they have made an end of it. 
Thus they celebrate the festivals of Bacchus so long as they 
have any money left. Neither do they forget at the same time 



HUNTERS 45 

the goddess Venus, for whose beastly deHghts they find more 
women than they can make use of. For all the tavern-keepers 
and strumpets wait for the coming of these lewd Buccaneers, 
even after the same manner that they do at Amsterdam for 
the arrival of the East India fleet at the Texel. The said 
Buccaneers are hugely cruel and tyrannical towards their 
servants : insomuch that commonly these had rather be 
galley-slaves in the Straits, or saw brazil-wood in the rasp- 
houses^ of Holland, than serve such barbarous masters. 
^The second sort of hunters hunt nothing else but wild-boars. 
The flesh of these they salt, and, being thus preserved from 
corruption, they sell it unto the planters. These hunters have 
also the same vicious customs of life, and are as much addicted 
to all manner of debauchery as the former. But their manner 
of hunting is quite different from what is practised in Europe. 
For these Buccaneers have certain places, designed for hunting, 
where they live for the space of three or four months, and 
sometimes, though not often, a whole year. Such places are 
called deza boulan ; and in these, with only the company of 
five or six friends, who go along with them, they continue all 
the time above-mentioned in mutual friendship. The first 
Buccaneers we spoke of many times make an agreement with 
certain planters to furnish them with meat all the whole year 
at a certain price. The payment hereof is often made with 
two or three hundred-weight of tobacco, in the leaf. But the 
planters commonly into the bargain furnish them likewise with 
a servant, whom they send to help. Unto the servant they 
afford a sufficient quantity of all necessaries for that purpose, 
especially of powder, bullets, and small shot, to hunt withal ^ 
^The planters began to cultivate and plant the isle of Tortuga 
in the year 1598. The first plantation was of tobacco, the 
which grew to admiration, being Hkewise of very good quality. 
Notwithstanding, by reason of the small circumference of the 
island, they were then able to plant but little ; especially there 
being many pieces of land in that isle that were not fit to 
produce tobacco. They attempted likewise to make sugar, 
but, by reason of the great expenses necessary to defray the 

^ Houses of correction, at one time in use in Holland and Germany. 
Prisoners were put to rasping wood. Cf. Evelyn, Diary, 19 Aug. 1641 : 
" We went to see the ra^p-house, where lusty knaves are compell'd to 
worke, and the rasping of brasill and logwood is very hard labour." 



46 BEANS; POTATOES 

charges, they could not bring it to any effect. So that the 
greatest part of the inhabitants, as we said before, betook 
themselves to the exercise of hunting, and the remaining part 
to that of piracy. At last the hunters, finding themselves 
scarce able to subsist by their first profession, began likewise to 
seek out lands that might be rendered fit for culture ; and in 
these also they planted tobacco. •The first land that they 
chose for this purpose was Cul de Sac, whose territory extends 
towards the Southern part of the island. This piece of ground 
they divided into several quarters, which were called the Great 
Amea, Niep, Rochelois, the Little Grave, the Great Grave, 
and the Augame. TIere, by little and little, they increased so 
much that at present there are above two thousand planters 
in those fields. At the beginning they endured very much 
hardship, seeing that, while they were busied about their 
husbandry, they could not go out of the island to seek pro- 
visions. This hardship was also increased by the necessity of 
grubbing, cutting down, burning, and digging, whereby to 
extirpate the innumerable roots of shrubs and trees./ For 
when the French possessed themselves of that island, it was 
wholly overgrown with woods extremely thick, these being 
inhabited only by an extraordinary number of wild-boars. 
The method they took to clear the ground was to divide them- 
selves into small companies of two or three persons together, 
and these companies to separate far enough from each other, 
provided with a few hatchets and some quantity of coarse 
provision. With these things they used to go into the woods, 
and there to build huts for their habitation, of only a few 
rafters and boughs of trees. Their first endeavour was to 
root up the shrubs and little trees ; afterwards to cut down 
the great ones. These they gathered into heaps, with their 
branches, and then set them on fire, excepting the roots, which, 
last of all, they were constrained to grub and dig up after the 
best manner they could. The first seed they committed to the 
ground was beans. These in those countries both ripen and 
dry away in the space of six weeks. 

The second fruit necessary to human life which here they 
tried was potatoes. These come not to perfection in lesser 
time than four or five months. On these they most commonly 
make their breakfasts every morning. They dress them no 
otherwise than by boiling them in a kettle with fair water. 



CASSAVA; VEYCOU; BANANAS 47 

Afterwards they cover them with a cloth for the space of half- 
an-hoiir, by which manner of dressing they become as soft as 
boiled chestnuts. Of the said potatoes also they make a 
drink called maiz. They cut them into small slices, and cover 
them with hot water. When they are well imbibed with water, 
they press them through a coarse cloth, and the liquor that 
comes out, although somewhat thick, they keep in vessels 
made for that purpose. Here, after settling two or three days, 
it begins to work ; and, having thrown off its lees, is fit for 
drink. They use it with great delight, apd although the taste 
is somewhat sour, yet it is very pleasant, substantial, and 
wholesome. The industry of this composition is owing 
unto the Indians, as well as of many others, which the ingeni- 
osity of those barbarians caused them to invent both for the 
preservation and the pleasure of their own life. 

The third fruit the newly cultivated land afforded was 
mandioca, which the Indians by another name call castava. 
This is a certain root which they plant, but comes not to per- 
fection till after eight or nine months, yea, sometimes a whole 
year. Being thoroughly ripe, it may be left in the ground the 
space of eleven or twelve months, without the least suspicion 
of corruption. But, this time being past, the said roots must 
be converted unto use some way or another, otherwise they 
conceive a total putrefaction. Of these roots of cassava, in 
those countries, ^s made a sort of granulous flour, or meal, 
extremely dry and white, which supplies the want of common 
bread made of wheat, whereof the fields are altogether barren 
in that island. For this purpose they have in their houses 
certain graters made either of copper or tin, wherewith they 
grate the aforementioned roots, just as they use to do mirick 
in Holland. By the by, let me tell you, mirick is a certain 
root of a very biting taste, not unlike unto strong mustard, 
wherewith they usually make sauces for some sorts of fish. 
When they have grated as much cassava root as will serve 
turn, they put the gratings into bags, or sacks, made of coarse 
linen, and press out all the moisture, until they remain very 
dry. Afterwards they pass the gratings through a sieve, 
leaving them, after sifting, very like unto sawdust. The meal 
being thus prepared, they lay it upon planches of iron, which 
are made very hot, upon which it is converted into a sort of 
cakes, very thin. These cakes are afterwards placed in the 



48 MANNER OF PLANTING TOBACCO 

sun, upon the tops of houses, where they are thoroughly and 
perfectly dried. And lest they should lose any part of their 
meal, what did not pass the sieve is made into up rolls, 5 or 6 
inches thick. These are placed one upon another, and left 
in this posture until they begin to corrupt. Of this corrupted 
matter they make a liquor, by them called veycou, which they 
find very excellent, and certainly is not inferior unto our 
English beer. 

Bananas are likewise another sort of fruit, of which is made 
another excellent liquor, which, both in strength and pleasant- 
ness of taste, may be compared unto the best wines of Spain. 
But this liquor of bananas, as it easily causes drunkenness in 
such as use it immoderately, so it likewise very frequently 
inflames the throat, and produces dangerous diseases in that 
part. Guines agudos is also another fruit whereof they make 
drink. But this sort of liquor is not so strong as the preceding. 
Howbeit, both the one and the other are frequently mingled 
with water, thereby to quench thirst. 

After they had cultivated these plantations, and filled them 
with all sorts of roots and fruits necessary for human life, they 
began to plant tobacco, for trading. The manner of planting 
this frequent commodity is as follows. They make certain 
beds of earth in the field, no larger than twelve-foot square. 
These beds they cover very well with palmetto-leaves, to the 
intent that the rays of the sun may not touch the earth where- 
in tobacco is sowed. They water them likewise, when it does 
not rain, as we do our gardens in Europe. When it is grown 
about the bigness of young lettuce, they transplant it into 
straight lines, which they make in other spacious fields, setting 
every plant at the distance of 3 foot from each other. They 
observe, likewise, the fittest seasons of the year for these 
things, which are commonly from January until the end of 
March, these being the months wherein most rains do fall in 
those countries. Tobacco ought to be weeded very carefully, 
seeing the least root of any other herb, coming near it, is 
sufficient to hinder its growth. When it is grown to the 
height of one foot and a half or thereabouts, they cut off the 
tops — thereby to hinder the stalks and leaves from shooting 
too high upwards, to the intent that the whole plant may 
receive greater strength from the earth, which affords unto 
it all its vigour and taste. While it ripens and comes to full 



SUBJECTION OF THE PLANTERS 49 

perfection, they prepare in their houses certain apartments 
of fifty or three-score foot in length and thirty or forty in 
breadth. These they fill with branches of trees and rafters, 
and upon them lay the green tobacco to dry. ^When it is 
thoroughly dried, they strip off the leaf from the stalks, and 
cause it to be rolled up by certain people who are employed in 
this work and no other. >. Unto these they afford for their 
labour the tenth part of what they make up into rolls. This 
property is peculiar unto tobacco, which therefore I shall not 
omit, that if, while it is yet in the ground, the leaf be pulled off 
from the stalk, it sprouts again, no less than four times in one 
year. Here I should be glad to give an account also of the 
manner of making sugar, indigo and gimbes^ ; but, seeing 
these things are not planted in those parts whereof we now 
speak, I have thought fit to pass them over in silence. 
^The French planters of the isle of Hispaniola have always 
unto this present time been subject unto the Governors of 
Tortuga. Yet this obedience has not been rendered without 
much reluctance and grudging on their side. In the year 1664 
the West India Company of France laid the foundations of 
a colony in Tortuga, under which colony the planters of 
Hispaniola were comprehended and named as subjects 
thereunto. This decree disgusted the said planters very 
much, they taking it very ill to be reputed subjects unto a 
private Company of men who had no authority to make them 
so ; especially being in a country which belonged not unto 
the dominions of the King of France. Hereupon they resolved 
to work no longer for the said Company. And this resolution 
of theirs was sufficient to compel the Company to a total 
dissolution of the Colony. But at last the Governor of 
Tortuga, who was pretty well stocked with planters, con- 
ceiving he could more easily force them than the West India 
Company, found an invention whereby to draw them unto his 
obedience. He promised them he would put off their several 
sorts of merchandize, and cause such returns to be made, in 
lieu of their goods from France, as they should best like. 
Withal, he dealt with the merchants under-hand, that all ships 
whatsoever should come consigned unto him, and no persons 
should entertain any correspondence with those planters of 

* Perhaps gambier, gantbir, an astringent extract from the leaves of 
Uncaria Gambit. 



50 FIRST DUTCH TRADE 

Hispaniola ; thinking thereby to avoid many inconveniences, 
and compel them through necessity and want of all things 
to obey. By these means he not only obtained the obedience 
he designed from those people, but also that some merchants 
who had promised to deal with them and visit them now and 
then, no longer did it. 

Notwithstanding what has been said, in the year 1669 two 
ships from Holland happened to arrive at the isle of Hispaniola 
with all sorts of merchandize necessary in those parts. With 
these ships presently the planters aforesaid resolved to deal, 
and with the Dutch nation for the future, thinking hereby to 
withdraw their obedience from the Governor of Tortuga, and, 
by frustrating his designs, revenge themselves of what they had 
endured under his government. Not long after the arrival of 
the Hollanders, the Governor of Tortuga came to visit the 
plantation of Hispaniola, in a vessel very well armed. But 
the planters not only forbade him to come ashore, but with 
their guns also forced him to weigh anchor, and retire faster 
than he came. Thus the Hollanders began to trade with these 
people for all manner of things. But such relations and friends 
as the Governor had in Hispaniola used all the endeavours 
they were capable of to impede the commerce. This being 
understood by the planters, they sent them word that in case 
they laid not aside their artifices, for the hinder ance of the com- 
merce which was begun with the Hollanders, they should every 
one assuredly be torn in pieces. Moreover, to oblige farther the 
Hollanders and contemn the Governor and his party, they 
gave greater ladings unto the two ships than they could desire, 
with many gifts and presents unto the officers and mariners, 
whereby they sent them very well contented to their own 
country. The Hollanders came again very punctually, 
according to their promise, and found the planters under a 
greater indignation than before against the Governor ; either 
because of the great satisfaction they had already conceived of 
this commerce with the Dutch, or that by their means they 
hoped to subsist by themselves without any further dependence 
upon the French nation. However it was, suddenly after they 
set up another resolution something more strange than the 
preceding. The tenour hereof was that they would go unto 
the island of Tortuga, and cut the Governor in pieces. Here- 
upon they gathered together as many canoes as they could, 



PLAN TO KILL THE GOVERNOR 51 

and set sail from Hispaniola, with design not only to kill the 
Governor, but also to possess themselves of the whole island. 
This they thought they could more easily perform by reason 
of all necessary assistance which they believed would at any 
time be sent them from Holland. By which means they were 
already determined in their minds to erect themselves into a 
new Commonwealth, independent of the Crown of France. 
But no sooner had they begun this great revolution of their 
little State, when they received news of a war declared between 
the two nations in Europe. This wrought such a consterna- 
tion in their minds as caused them to give over that enter- 
prize and retire without attempting anything. 

In the meanwhile the Governor of Tortuga sent into France 
for aid towards his own security and the reduction of those 
people to their former obedience. This was granted him, 
and two men-of-war were sent unto Tortuga, with orders to 
be at his commands. Having received such a considerable 
support, he sent them very well equipped to the isle of His- 
paniola. Being arrived at the place, they landed part of their 
forces, with a design to force the people to the obedience of 
those whom they much hated in their hearts. But the planters, 
seeing the arrival of those two frigates and not being ignorant 
of their design, fled into the woods, abandoning their houses 
and many of their goods, which they left behind. These 
were immediately rifled and burnt by the French without 
any compassion, not sparing the least cottage they found. 
Afterwards the Governor began to relent in his anger, and let 
them know by some messengers that in case they would return 
unto his obedience, he would give ear unto some accommodation 
betwixt them. Hereupon the planters, finding themselves 
destitute of all human relief and that they could expect no 
help from any side, surrendered unto the Governor upon 
articles, which were made and signed on both sides. But 
these were not too strictly observed, for he commanded two 
of the chief among them to be hanged. The residue were 
pardoned, and withal he gave them free leave to trade with any 
nation whatsoever they found most fit for their purpose. With 
the grant of this liberty they began to recultivate their plant- 
ations, which gave them an huge quantity of very good 
tobacco ; they selling yearly to the sum of 20 or 30 thousand 
rolls. ^ 



52 CRUELTY OF A PLANTER 

/In this country tlie planters have but very few slaves, for 
want of which they themselves, and some servants they have, 
are constrained to do all the drudgery. These servants com- 
monly oblige and bind themselves unto their masters for the 
space of three years. But their masters, forsaking all con- 
science and justice, oftentimes traffic with their bodies as with 
horses at a fair ; selling them unto other masters, even just as 
they sell negroes brought from the coast of Guinea. Yea, to 
advance this trade, some persons there are who go purposely 
into France (the same happens in England and other coun- 
tries), and, travelling through the cities, towns, and villages, 
endeavour to pick up young men or boys, whom they trans- 
port, by making them great promises. These, being once 
allured and conveyed into the islands I speak of, they force to 
work like horses, the toil they impose upon them being much 
harder than what they usually enjoin unto the negroes, their 
slaves. For these they endeavour in some manner to pre- 
serve, as being their perpetual bond-men ; but, as for their 
white servants, they care not whether they live or die, seeing 
they are to continue no longer than three years in their service. ^ 
These miserable kidnapped people are frequently subject unto 
a certain disease, which in those parts is called coma, being a 
total privation of all their senses. And this distemper is 
judged to proceed from their hard usage, together with the 
change of their native climate into that which is directly 
opposite. Oftentimes it happens that, among these transported 
people, such are found as are persons of good quality and 
tender education. And these, being of a softer constitution, 
are more suddenly surprised with the disease above-mentioned, 
and with several others belonging to those countries, than those 
who have harder bodies and have been brought up to all 
manner of fatigue. Besides the hard usage they endure in 
their diet, apparel, and repose, many times they beat them so 
cruelly that some of them fall down dead under the hands of 
their cruel masters. This I have often seen with my own eyes, 
not without great grief and regret. Of many instances of 
this nature I shall give you only the following history, as being 
something more remarkable in its circumstances. 

It happened that a certain planter of those countries 
exercised such cruelty towards one of his servants as caused 
him to run away. Having absconded for some days in the 



TORTURE OF A SERVANT S3 

woods from the fury of his tyrannical master, at last he was 
taken, and brought back to the dominion of this wicked 
Pharaoh. No sooner had he got him into his hands but he 
commanded him to be tied unto a tree. Here he gave him 
so many lashes upon his naked back as made his body run an 
entire stream of gore-blood, embruing therewith the ground 
about the tree. Afterwards, to make the smart of his wounds 
the greater, he anointed them with juice of lemon mingled 
with salt and pepper, being grounded small together. In this 
miserable posture he left him tied unto the tree for the space of 
four-and-twenty hours. These being past, he commenced his 
punishment again, lashing him as before, with so much cruelty 
that the miserable wretch, under this torture, gave up the 
ghost, with these dying words in his mouth : / beseech the 
Almighty God, Creator of heaven and earth, that he permit the 
wicked Spirit to make thee feel as many torments before thy death 
as thou hast caused me to feel before mine. A strange thing and 
worthy all astonishment and admiration ! Scarce three or 
four days were past after this horrible fact, when the Almighty 
Judge, who had heard the clamours of that tormented wretch, 
gave permission to the Author of Wickedness suddenly to 
possess the body of that barbarous and inhuman Amirricide^, 
who tormented him to death. Insomuch that those tyran- 
nical hands, wherewith he had punished to death his innocent 
servant, were the tormentors of his own body. For with 
them, after a miserable manner, he did beat himself and lacer- 
ated his own flesh, till he lost the very shape of man which 
nature had given him, not ceasing to howl and cry, without 
any rest either by day or night. Thus he continued to do 
until he died, in that condition of raving madness wherein 
he surrendered his ghost unto the same Spirit of Darkness who 
had tormented his body. Many other examples of this kind 
I could rehearse, but these, not belonging unto our present 
discourse, I shall therefore omit. 

The planters that inhabit the Caribbee Islands are rather 
worse and more cruel unto their servants than the preceding. 
In the Isle of Saint Christopher dwells one, whose name is 
Bettesa, very well known among the Dutch merchants, who 

^ The allusion here seems to be irrecoverable. Research in all 
book-i of reference likely to yield a result, and inquiries of many 
classical and literary experts have proved quite futile. 



54 PLANTERS' CRUELTIES 

has killed above a hundred of his servants with blows and 
stripes. -nThe English do the same with their servants. And 
the mildest cruelty they exercise towards them is that, when 
they have served six years of their time (the years they are 
bound for among the English being seven complete), they use 
them with such cruel hardship as forces them to beg of their 
masters to sell them unto others, although it be to begin an- 
other servitude of seven years, or at least three or four. I 
have known many who after this manner served fifteen and 
twenty years before they could obtain their freedom. /Another 
thing very rigorous among that nation is a law in those islands, 
whereby if any man owes to another above five -and-twenty 
shillings, English money, in case he cannot pay, he is liable to 
be sold for the space of six or eight months. I shall not trouble 
the patience of my reader any longer with relations of this 
kind, as belonging unto another subject different from what 
I have proposed to myself in this history. Whereupon I 
shall take my beginning hence to describe the famous actions 
and exploits of the greatest Pirates of my time, during my 
residence in those parts. These I shall endeavour to relate 
without the least note of passion or partiality ; yea, with 
that candour which is peculiar both to my mind and style : 
withal certifying my reader I shall give him no stories taken 
from others upon trust or hearsay, but only those enterprizes 
unto which I was myself an eye-witness. 



CHAPTER VI 

Of the origin of the most famous Pirates of the coasts of America. 
A notable exploit of Pierre le Grand 

I HAVE told you in the preceding chapters of this book after 
what manner I was compelled to adventure my life among 
the Pirates of America — unto which sort of men I think my- 
self obliged to give this name, for no other reason than that 
they are not maintained or upheld in their actions by any 
Sovereign Prince. For this is certain, that the Kings of Spain 
have upon several occasions sent by their Ambassadors to the 
Kings of France and England, complaining of the molestations 
and troubles those Pirates often caused upon the coasts of America, 
even in the calm of peace. Unto whose ambassadors it has 
always been answered : That such men did not commit those 
acts of hostility and piracy as subjects of their Majesties ; and 
therefore his Catholic Majesty might proceed against them accord- 
ing as he should find fit. The King of France, besides what 
has been said, added unto this answer : That he had no fort- 
ress nor castle upon the isle of Hispaniola ; neither did he receive 
one farthing of tribute thence. Moreover, the King of England 
adjoined : That he had never given any patents or commissions 
unto those of famaicafor committing any hostility against the sub- 
jects of his Catholic Majesty. Neither did he only give this bare 
answer, but also, out of his Royal desire to pleasure the Court 
of Spain, recalled the Governor of Jamaica, placing another in 
his room.^^11 this was not sufficient to prevent the Pirates of 
those parts from acting what mischief they could to the 
contrary. But, before I commence the relation of their bold 
and insolent actions, I shall say something of their origin and 
most common exercises, as also of the chiefest among them, 
and their manner of arming before they go out to sea. 
The first Pirate that was known upon the island of Tortuga 

55 



S6 THE RISE OF PIERRE LE GRAND 

was named Pierre le Grand, or Peter the Great. He was 
born at the town of Dieppe, in Normandy. The action which 
rendered him famous was his taking of the Vice-Admiral of 
the Spanish jiota}, nigh unto the Cape of Tiburon, upon the 
Western side of the island of Hispaniola. This bold e.xploit 
he performed alone with one only boat, wherein he had eight- 
and-twenty persons, no more, to help him. What gave occa- 
sion unto this enterprize was that until that time the Spaniards 
had passed and repassed with all security, and without finding 
the least opposition, through the Channel of Bahama. So 
that Pierre le Grand set out to sea by the Caicos, where he 
took this great ship with almost all facility imaginable. The 
Spaniards they found aboard were all set on shore, and the 
vessel presently sent into France. The manner how this 
undaunted spirit attempted and took such an huge ship, I 
shall give you out of the Journal of a true and faithful author 
in the same words I read them : The boat, saith he, wherein 
Pierre le Grand was with his companions, had now been at sea 
a long time, without finding anything, according to his intent of 
piracy suitable to make a prey. And now, their provisions 
beginning to fail, they could keep themselves no longer upon the 
ocean or they must of necessity starve. Being almost reduced 
to despair, they espied a great ship belonging to the Spanish flota 
which had separated from the rest. This bulky vessel they 
resolved to set upon and take, or die in the attempt. Hereupon 
they made sail towards her, with design to view her strength. 
And, although they judged the vessel to be far above their forces, 
yet the covetousness of such a prey and the extremity of fortune they 
were reduced unto, made them adventure upon such an enterprize. 
Being now come so near that they could not escape without danger 
of being all killed, the Pirates jointly made an oath unto their 
captain, Pierre le Grand, to behave themselves courageously in 
this attempt without the least fear or fainting. True it is that 
these rovers had conceived an opinion they should find the ship 
unprovided to fight, and that through this occasion they should 
master her by degrees. It was in the dusk of the evening, or soon 
after, when this great action was performed. But, before it was 

^ Spanish, a fleet of merchant-ships. " The flota is a fleet of large 
ships which carry the goods of Europe to the ports of America, and bring 
back the produce of Mexico, Peru, and other kingdoms of the ^eyr 
World " — Swinburne. Travels in Spain [1779], Letter 28, 



PIRACY SI 

begun, they gave orders unto the surgeon of the hoot to bore a hole 
in the sides thereof, to the intent that, their own vessel sinking 
under them, they might be compelled to attack more vigorously 
and endeavour more hastily to run aboard the great ship. This 
was performed accordingly ; and, without any other arms than 
a pistol in one of their hands and a sword in the other, they 
immediately climbed up the sides of the ship, and ran altogether 
into the great cabin, where they found the Captain, with several 
of his companions, playing at cards. Here they set a pistol to 
his breast, commanding him to deliver up the ship unto their 
obedience. The Spaniards, seeing the Pirates aboard their ship, 
without scarce having seen them at sea, cried out : " Jesus bless 
us ! Are these devils, or what are they ? " In the meanwhile, 
some of them took possession of the gun-room, and seized the arms 
and military affairs they found there, killing as many of the ship 
as made any opposition. By which means the Spaniards 
presently were compelled to surrender. That very day the 
Captain of the ship had been told by some of the seamen that the 
boat, which was in view cruizing, was a boat of Pirates. Unto 
whom the Captain, slighting their advice, made answer : " What 
then ? Must I be afraid of such a pitiful thing as that is ? 
No, nor though she were a ship as big and as strong as mine 
is." As soon as Pierre le Grand had taken this magnificent prize, 
he detained in his service as many of the common seamen as he 
had need of, and the rest he set on shore. This being done, he 
immediately set sail for France, carrying with him all the riches 
he found in that huge vessel : there he continued without ever 
returning unto the parts of America. 

/The planters and hunters of the isle of Tortuga had no sooner 
understood this happy event, and the rich prize those Pirates 
had obtained, but they resolved to follow their example. 
Hereupon many of them left their ordinary exercises and 
common employments, and used what means they could to 
get either boats or small vessels wherein to exercise piracy. 
But, being not able either to purchase or build them at Tortuga, 
at last they resolved to set forth in their canoes and seek them 
elsewhere. With these, therefore, they cruized at first upon 
Cape d'Alvarez, whereabouts the Spaniards used much to 
trade from one city to another in small boats. In these 
they carry hides, tobacco, and other commodities unto 
the port of liavaiia, which is the nxetropolis of that island 



58 PIRACY INCREASES 

and unto which the Spaniards from Europe do frequently 
resort. 

Hereabouts it was that those Pirates at the beginning took 
a great number of boats, laden with the aforesaid commodities. 
These boats they used to carry to the isle of Tortuga, and there 
sell the whole purchase unto the ships that waited in the 
port for their return or accidentally happened to be there. 
With the gains of these prizes they provided themselves with 
necessaries wherewithal to undertake other voyages./ Some 
of these voyages were made towards the coast of Campeche, 
and others towards that of New Spain ; in both which places 
the Spaniards at that time did frequently exercise much com- 
merce and trade. Upon those coasts they commonly found 
great number of trading vessels and many times ships of great 
burden. Two of the biggest of these vessels, and two great 
ships which the Spaniards had laden with plate in the port 
of Campeche to go unto Caracas, they took in less than a 
month's time, by cruizing to and fro. Being arrived at Tor- 
tuga with these prizes, and the whole people of the island 
admiring their progresses, especially that within the space of 
two years the riches of the country were much increased, the 
number also of Pirates did augment so fast that from these 
beginnings, within a little s^ace of time, there were to be num- 
bered in that small island and port above twenty ships of this 
sort of people. Hereupon the Spaniards, not able to bear their 
robberies any longer, were constrained to put forth to sea two 
great men-of-war, both for the defence of their own coasts 
and to cruize upon the enemies. 



CHAPTER VII 

After what manner the Pirates arm their vessels, and how they 
regulate their voyages 

/before the Pirates go out to sea, they give notice unto every- 
one that goes upon the voyage, of the day on which they ought 
precisely to embark, intimating also unto them their obliga- 
tion of bringing each man in particular so many pounds of 
powder and bullets as they think necessary for that expedition. 
Being all come on board, they join together in council, concern- 
ing what place they ought first to go unto wherein to get 
provisions — especially of flesh, seeing they scarce eat anything 
else.^ And of this the most common sort among them is pork. 
The next food is tortoises, which they use to salt a little. 
Sometimes they resolve to rob such or such hog-yards, 
wherein the Spaniards often have a thousand head of swine 
together. They come unto these places in the dark of the 
night, and, having beset the keeper's lodge, they force him to 
rise and give them as many heads as they desire, threatening 
withal to kill him in case he disobeys their commands or makes 
any noise. Yea, these menaces are oftentimes put in execu- 
tion, without giving any quarter unto the miserable swine- 
keepers or any other person that endeavours to hinder their 
robberies. 
Tlaving gotten provisions of flesh sufficient for their voyage, 
they return unto their ship. Here their allowance, twice a day 
to every one, is as much as he can eat, without either weight or 
measure. Neither does the steward of the vessel give any greater 
proportion of flesh, or anything else, unto the Captain than unto 
the meanest mariner. The ship being well victualled, they call 
another council, to deliberate towards what place they shall 
go to seek their desperate fortunes. In this council, likewise, 
they agree upon certain articles, which are put in writing, by 
way of bond or obligation, which every one is bound to ob- 

59 



6o ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 

serve, and all of them, or the chiefest, do set their hands unto. 
Herein they specify, and set down very distinctly, what sums 
of money each particular person ought to have for that voyage, 
the fund of all the payments being the common stock of what 
is gotten by the whole expedition ; for otherwise it is the same 
law, among these people as with other Pirates : No prey, no 
pay. In the first place, therefore, they mention how much the 
Captain ought to have for his ship. Next the salary of the 
carpenter, or shipwright, who careened, mended, and rigged the 
vessel. This commonly amounts unto loo or 150 pieces-of- 
eight^, being, according to the agreement, more or less. 
Afterwards for provisions and victualling they draw out of 
the same common stock about 200 pieces-of-eight. Also a 
competent salary for the surgeon and his chest of medica- 
ments, which usually is rated at 200 or 250 pieces-of-eight. 
Lastly, they stipulate in writing what recompense or re- 
ward each one ought to have that is either wounded or 
maimed in his body, suffering the loss of any limb, by that 
voyage. Thus they order for the loss of a right arm 600 
pieces-of-eight, or 6 slaves; for the loss of a left arm 500 
pieces-of-eight, or 5 slaves ; for a right leg 500 pieces-of- 
eight, or 5 slaves ; for a left leg 400 pieces-of-eight, or 4 
slaves ; for an eye 100 pieces-of-eight, or one slave ; 
for a finger of the hand the same reward as for the 
eye. All which sums of money, as I have said before, are 
taken out of the capital sum or common stock of what is gotten 
by their piracy. For a very exact and equal dividend is made 
of the remainder among them all. Yet herein they have also 
regard unto qualities and places. Thus the Captain, or chief 
Commander, is allotted five or six portions to what the ordi- 
nary seamen have ; the Master's Mate only two ; and other 
Officers proportionable to their employment. After whom 
they draw equal parts from the highest even to the lowest 
mariner, the boys not being omitted. For even these draw 
half a share, by reason that, when they happen to take a better 
vessel than their own, it is the duty of the boys to set fire unto 
the ship or boat wherein they are, and then retire unto the 
prize which they have taken. 

^ A piece-of-eight is about five shillings sterling. (Note in original 
book.) It is a " hard doJl?Lr ", the Spanish piaster, wprtti ^.bput 4s. 2d. 
(before i9M)-i 



TORTOISES 6 1 

They observe among themselves very good orders. For in 
the prizes they take, it is severely prohibited unto every one 
to usurp anything in particular unto themselves. Hence all 
they take is equally divided, according to what has been said 
before. Yea, they make a solemn oath to each other not to 
abscond, or conceal the least thing they find amongst the prey. 
If afterwards any one is found unfaithful, and has contravened 
the said oath, immediately he is separated and turned out 
of the society. Among themselves they are very civil and 
charitable to each other. Insomuch that, if any wants what 
another has, with great liberality they give it one to another. 
As soon as these Pirates have taken any prize of ship or boat, 
the first thing they endeavour is to set on shore the prisoners, 
detaining only some few for their own help and service, unto 
whom also they give their Hberty after the space of two or 
three years.^They put in very frequently for refreshment at 
one island or another, but more especially into those which lie 
on the Southern side of the isle of Cuba. Here they careen 
their vessels, and in the meanwhile some of them go to hunt, 
others to cruize upon the seas in canoes, seeking their fortune. 
Many times they take the poor fishermen of tortoises, and, 
carrying them to their habitations, they make them work so 
long as the Pirates are pleased. 

In the several parts of America are found four distinct 
species of tortoises. The first hereof are so great that every 
one reaches to the weight of 2 or 3 thousand pounds. The 
scales of the species are so soft as that easily they may be cut 
with a knife. Yet these tortoises are not good to be eaten. 
The second species is of an indifferent bigness, and are green in 
colour. The scales of these are harder than the first, and this 
sort is of a very pleasant taste. The third is very little 
different in size and bigness from the second, unless that it has 
the head something bigger. This third species is called by the 
French cavana, and is not good for food. The fourth is named 
caret, being very like to the tortoises we have in Europe. 
This sort keeps most commonly among the rocks, whence they 
crawl out to seek their food, which is for the greatest part 
nothing but apples of the sea. Those other species above- 
mentioned feed upon grass which grows in the water upon the 
banks of the sand. These banks, or shelves, for their pleasant 
green do here resemble the deUghtful meadows of the United 



62 MANNER OF FISHING FOR TORTOISES 

Provinces. Their eggs are almost like unto those of the 
crocodile, but without any shell, being only covered with a 
thin membrane or film. They are found in such prodigious 
quantities along the sandy shores of those countries that, 
were they not frequently destroyed by birds, the sea would 
infinitely abound with tortoises. 

These creatures have certain customary places whither they 
repair every year to lay their eggs. The chiefest of these 
places are the three islands called Caymanes, situated in the 
latitude of 20 degrees and 15 minutes North, being at the 
distance of five-and-forty-leagues from the isle of Cuba, on- 
the Northern side thereof. 

It is a thing much deserving consideration how the tortoises 
can find out these islands. For the greatest part of them come 
from the Gulf of Honduras, distant thence the whole space of 
150 leagues. Certain it is, that many times the ships, having 
lost their latitude through the darkness of the weather, have 
steered their course only by the noise of tortoises swimming 
that way, and have arrived unto those isles. When their 
season of hatching is past, they retire towards the island of 
Cuba, where are many good places that afford them food. 
But while they are at the islands of Caymanes, they eat very 
little or nothing. When they have been about the space of 
one month in the seas of Cuba, and are grown fat, the Span- 
iards go out to fish for them, they being then to be taken in 
such abundance that they provide with them sufficiently their 
cities, towns, and villages. Their manner of taking them is by 
making with a great nail a certain kind of dart. This they fix 
at the end of a long stick or pole, with which they wound the 
tortoises, as with a dagger, whensoever they appear above 
water to breathe fresh air. 

The inhabitants of New Spain and Campeche lade their 
principal sorts of merchandizes in ships of great bulk ; and 
with these they exercise their commerce to and fro. The 
vessels from Campeche in winter-time set out towards Caracas, 
Trinity Isles, and that of Margarita. For in summer the 
winds are contrary, though very favourable to return unto 
Campeche, as they use to do at the beginning of that season. 
The Pirates are not ignorant of these times, being very dexterous 
in searching out all places and circumstances most suitable 
to their designs. Hence in the places and seasons afore- 



FRANgOIS ATTACKS PEARL-FISHERS 63 

mentioned, they cruize upon the said ships for some while. 
But, in case they can perform nothing, and that fortune does 
not favour them with some prize or other, after holding a 
council thereupon, they commonly enterprize things very 
desperate. Of these their resolutions I shall give you one 
instance very remarkable. One certain Pirate, whose name 
was Pierre Francois or Peter Francis, happened to be a long 
time at sea with his boat and six-and- twenty persons, waiting 
for the ships that were to return from Maracaibo towards 
Campeche. Not being able to find anything, nor get any prey, 
at last he resolved to direct his course to Rancherias, which is 
nigh unto the river called De la Plata, in the latitude of 
twelve-degrees-and-a-half North. In this place lies a rich 
bank of pearl, to the fishery whereof they yearly send from 
Cartagena a fleet of a dozen vessels, with a man-of-war for 
their defence. Every vessel has at least a couple of negroes in 
it, who are very dexterous in diving, even to the depths of six 
fathoms within the sea, whereabouts they find good store of 
pearls. Upon this fleet of vessels, though small, called the 
Pearl Fleet, Pierre Francois resolved to adventure rather than 
go home with empty hands. They rode at anchor, at that 
time, at the mouth of the river De la Hacha, the man-of-war 
being scarce half-a-league distant from the small ships, and 
the wind very calm. Having espied them in this posture, he 
presently pulled down his sails and rowed along the coast, 
dissembling to be a Spanish vessel that came from Maracaibo 
and only passed that way. But, no sooner was he come unto 
the Pearl Bank, when suddenly he assaulted the Vice-Admiral 
of the said fleet, mounted with 8 guns and three-score men well 
armed, commanding them to surrender, But the Spaniards, 
running to their arms, did do what they could to defend them- 
selves, fighting for some while ; till at last they were constrained 
to submit unto the Pirate. Being thus possessed of the Vice- 
Admiral, he resolved next to adventure with some other 
stratagem upon the man-of-war, thinking thereby to get 
strength sufficient to master the rest of the fleet. With this 
intent he presently sank his own boat in the river ; and, 
putting forth the Spanish colours, weighed anchor ; with 
a Httle wind they began to stir, having with promises and 
menaces compelled most of the Spaniards to assist him in 
his design. But no sooner did the man-of-war perceive one 



64 SURRENDER TO THE MAN-OF-WAR 

of his fleet to set sail when he did so too, fearing lest the 
mariners should have any design to run away with the vessel 
and riches they had on board. This caused the Pirates 
immediately to give over that dangerous enterprize, as think- 
ing themselves unable to encounter force to force with the said 
man-of-war that now came against them. Hereupon they 
attempted to get out of the river and gain the open seas with 
the riches they had taken, by making as much sail as possibly 
the vessel would bear. This being perceived by the man-of- 
war, he presently gave 'um chase. But the Pirates, having 
laid on too much sail, and a gust of wind suddenly arising, 
had their main -mast blown down by the board, which 
disabled 'um from prosecuting their escape. 

This unhappy event much encouraged those that were in 
the man-of-war, they advancing and gaining upon the Pirates 
every moment ; by which means at last they were overtaken. 
But, these notwithstanding, finding themselves still with 
two-and-twenty persons sound, the rest being either killed or 
wounded, resolved to defend themselves so long as it were 
possible. This they performed very courageously for some 
while, until thereunto forced by the man-of-war, they were 
compelled to surrender. Yet was not this done without 
articles, which the Spaniards were glad to allow them, as 
follows : That they should not use them as slaves, forcing 
them to carry or bring stones or employing them in other 
labours for three or four years, as they commonly employ 
their negroes. But that they should set them on shore upon 
free land, without doing them harm in their bodies. Upon 
these articles they delivered themselves, with all that they 
had taken, which was worth only in pearls to the value of 
above 100,000 pieces-of -eight, besides the vessel, provisions, 
goods, and Sther things. All which being put together would 
have made unto this Pirate one of the greatest prizes he could 
desire ; which he had obtained, had it not been for the loss of 
his main-mast, as was said before. 

Another bold attempt, not unlike unto that which I have 
related nor less remarkable, I shall also give you at present. 
A certain Pirate, born in Portugal and from the name of his 
country called Bartholomew Portugues, was cruizing in his 
boat from Jamaica (wherein he had only thirty men and four 
small guns) upon the Cape de Corrientes, in the island of Cuba. 



BARTHOLOMEW PORTUGUES 67 

In this place he met with a great ship that came from Mara- 
caibo and Cartegena, bound for the Havana, well provided with 
twenty great guns and threescore-and-ten men, between 
passengers and mariners. This ship he presently assaulted, but 
found as strongly defended by them that were on board. 
The Pirate escaped the first encounter, resolving to attack her 
more vigorously than before, seeing he had sustained no great 
damage hitherto. This resolution he boldly performed, 
renewing his assaults so often till that, after a long and 
dangerous fight, he became master of the great vessel. The 
Portuguese lost only ten men and had four wounded, so 
that he had still remaining twenty fighting men, whereas the 
Spaniards had double the same number. Having possessed 
themselves of such a ship, and the wind being contrary to 
return unto Jamaica, they resolved to steer their course 
towards the Cape of Saint Antony (which lies on the Western 
side of the isle of Cuba), there to repair themselves and 
take in fresh water, of which they had great necessity at 
that time. 

Being now very near unto the cape above-mentioned, they 
unexpectedly met with three great ships that were coming 
from New Spain and bound for the Havana. By these, as 
not being able to escape, they were easily retaken, both ship 
and Pirates. Thus they were all made prisoners through the 
sudden change of fortune, and found themselves poor, op- 
pressed, and stripped of all the riches they had purchased^ so 
httle before. The cargo of this ship consisted of 120,000 weight 
of coco-nuts, the chiefest ingredient of that rich Uquor called 
chocolate, and threescore-and-ten thousand pieces-of-eight. 
Two days after this misfortune, there happened to arise an 
huge and dangerous tempest, which largely separated the 
ships from one another. The great vessel, wherein the Pirates 
were, arrived at Campeche, where many considerable merchants 
came to salute and welcome the Captain thereof. These 
presently knew the Portuguese Pirate, as being him who had 
committed innumerable excessive insolences upon those coasts, 
not only infinite murders and robberies but also lamentable 

* Obsolete use of the word ' purchase ' (vb. and noun), originally 
"the action of hunting; the chase; the catching or seizing of prey" 
{N.E.D.) : hence pillage, plunder, booty. Frequently used throughout 
this book and other early, books on the Buccaneers. 



68 CAPTURE OF PORTUGUES 

incendiums^, which those of Campeche still preserved very 
fresh in their memory. 

Hereupon, the next day after their arrival, the magistrates 
of the city sent several of their officers to demand and take 
into custody the criminal prisoners from on board the ship, 
with intent to punish them according to their deserts. 
Yet, fearing lest the Captain of those Pirates should escape 
out of their hands on shore (as he had formerly done, being 
once their prisoner in the city before), they judged it more 
convenient to leave him safely guarded on board the ship 
for the present. In the meanwhile they caused a gibbet 
to be erected, whereupon to hang him the very next day, 
without any other form of process than to lead him from 
the ship unto the place of punishment. The rumour of 
this future tragedy was presently brought unto Bartholo- 
mew Portugues' ears, whereby he sought all the means he 
could to escape that night. With this design he took two 
earthen jars, wherein the Spaniards usually carry wine from 
Spain unto the West Indies, and stopped them very well, 
intending to use them for swimming, as those who are unskil- 
ful in that art do calabashes, a sort of pumpkins, in Spain, and 
in other places empty bladders. Having made this necessary 
preparation, he waited for the night, when all should be asleep, 
even the sentry that guarded him. But, seeing he could not 
escape his vigilancy, he secretly purchased a knife, and with 
the same gave him such a mortal stab as suddenly deprived 
him of life and the possibility of making any noise. At that 
instant he committed himself to sea, with those two earthen 
jars before-mentioned, and by their help and support, though 
never having learned to swim, he reached the shore. Being 
arrived upon land, without any delay he took his refuge 
in the woods, where he hid himself for three days, with- 
out daring to appear, nor eating any other food than wild 
herbs. 

Those of the city failed not the next day to make a diligent 
search for him in the woods, where they concluded him to be. 
This strict inquiry Portugues had the convenience to espy 
from the hollow ojf a tree, wherein he lay absconded. Hence 
perceiving them to return without finding what they sought 
for, he adventured to sally forth towards the coasts called Del 

* Conflagrations. So-used in Howell, Parthenop. [1654], Preface. 



ESCAPE OF PORTUGUES 69 

Golfo Triste, forty leagues distant from the city of Campeche. 
Hither he arrived within a fortnight after his escape from the 
ship. In which space of time, as also afterwards, he endured 
extreme hunger, thirst, and fears of falling again into the hands 
of the Spaniards. For during all this journey he had no other 
provision with him than a small calabash, with a little water ; 
neither did he eat anything else than a few shell-fish, which he 
found among the rocks nigh the sea-shore. Besides that, he 
was compelled to pass yet some rivers, not knowing well to 
swim. Being in this distress, he found an old board which the 
waves had thrown upon the shore, wherein did stick a few great 
nails. These he took, and with no small labour whetted 
against a stone, until that he had made them capable of cutting 
like unto knives, though very imperfectly. With these, and 
no better instruments, he cut down some branches of trees, 
the which with twigs and osiers he joined together, and made 
as well as he could a boat, or rather a raft ^, wherewith he rafted* 
over the rivers. Thus he arrived finally at the Cape of Golfo 
Triste, as was said before, where he happened to find a certain 
vessel of Pirates, who were great comrades of his own, and were 
lately come from Jamaica. 

Unto these Pirates he instantly related all his adversities and 
misfortunes, and withal demanded of them that they would 
fit him with a boat and 20 men. With which company alone 
he promised to return to Campeche and assault the ship that 
was in the river, by which he had been taken, and escaped 
fourteen days before. They readily granted his request, and 
equipped him a boat with the said number of men. With this 
small company he set forth towards the execution of his design, 
which he bravely performed eight days after he separated from 
his comrades at the Cape of Golfo Triste. For, being arrived 
at the river of Campeche, with an undaunted courage and 
without any rumour of noise he assaulted the ship before- 
mentioned. Those that were on board were persuaded this 
was a boat from land that came to bring contra banda goods ; 
and hereupon were not in any posture of defence. Thus the 
Pirates, laying hold on this occasion, assaulted them with- 
out any fear of ill success, and in short space of time com- 
pelled the Spaniards to surrender. 

* In the original ' wafte.' 

« In the original ' wafted.' No doubt misprints. 



70 ROCHE BRASILIANO 

Being now masters of the ship, they immediately weighed 
anchor and set sail, determining to fly from the port lest they 
should be pursued by other vessels. This they did with 
extremity of joy, seeing themselves possessors of such a brave 
ship. Especially Portugues, their captain, who now by a 
second turn of fortune's wheel was become rich and powerful 
again, who had been so lately in that same vessel a poor 
miserable prisoner and condemned to the gallows. With this 
great purchase he designed in his mind greater things ; which 
he might well hope to obtain, seeing he had found in the vessel 
great quantity of rich merchandize still remaining on board, 
although the plate had been transported into the city. Thus he 
continued his voyage towards Jamaica for some days. But 
coming nigh into the isle of Pinos, on the South side of the 
island of Cuba, fortune suddenly turned her back unto him 
once more, never to show him her countenance again. For a 
horrible storm arising at sea occasioned the ship to spUt against 
the rocks or banks called Jardines. Insomuch that the vessel 
was totally lost, and Portugues, with his companions, escaped 
in a canoe. After this manner he arrived at Jamaica, where he 
remained no long time, being only there till he could prepare 
himself to seek his fortune anew, which from that time proved 
always adverse unto him. 

Nothing less rare and admirable than the preceding are the 
actions of another Pirate, who at present lives at Jamaica, 
and who has on sundry occasions enterprized and achieved 
things very strange. The place of his birth was the city of 
Groningen, in the United Provinces ; but his own proper name 
is not known : the Pirates, his companions, having only given 
him that of Roche Brasiliano by reason of his long residence in 
the country of Brazil, whence he was forced to flee, when 
the Portuguese retook those countries from the West India 
Company of Amsterdam, several nations then inhabiting at 
Brazil (as English, French, Dutch, and others) being con- 
strained to seek new fortunes. 

This fellow at that conjuncture of time retired unto Jamaica, 
where, being at a stand how to get a livelihood, he entered 
himself into the society of Pirates. Under these he served 
in quality of a private mariner for some while, in which 
degree he behaved himself so well as made him both beloved 
and respected by all, as one that deserved to be their 



ROCHE BRASILIANO'S CRUELTY 73 

Commander for the future. One day certain mariners hap- 
pened to engage in a dissension with their Captain ; the effect 
whereof was that they left the boat. BrasiHano followed the 
rest, and by these was chosen for their conductor and leader, 
who also fitted him out a boat or small vessel, wherein he 
received the title of Captain. 

Few days were past from his being chosen Captain, when he 
took a great ship that was coming from New Spain, on board 
of which he found great quantity of plate, and both one and 
the other he carried to Jamaica. This action gave him renown, 
and caused him to be both esteemed and feared, every one 
apprehending him much aboard. Howbeit, in his domestic 
and private affairs he had no good behaviour nor government 
over himself ; for in these he would oftentimes shew himself 
either brutish or foolish. Many times being in drink, he 
would run up and down the streets, beating or wounding 
whom he met, no person daring to oppose him or make any 
resistance. 

Unto the Spaniards he always showed himself very bar- 
barous and cruel, only out of an inveterate hatred he had 
against that nation. Of these he commanded several to be 
roasted alive upon wooden spits, for no other crime than that 
they would not shew him the places, or hog-yards, where he 
might steal swine. After many of these cruelties, it happened, 
as he was cruizing upon the coasts of Campeche, that a dismal 
tempest suddenly surprised him. This proved to be so violent 
that at last his ship was wrecked upon the coasts, the mariners 
only escaping with their muskets and some few bullets and 
powder, which were the only things they could save of all that 
was in the vessel. The place where the ship was lost was 
precisely between Campeche and the Golfo Triste. Here they 
got on shore in a canoe, and, marching along the coast with all 
the speed they could, they directed their course towards 
Golfo Triste, as being a place where the Pirates commonly 
used to repair and refresh themselves. Being upon this 
journey and all very hungry and thirsty, as is usual in desert 
places, they were pursued by some Spaniards, being a whole 
troop of a hundred horsemen. Brasiliano no sooner perceived 
this imminent danger than he animated his companions, tell- 
ing them : We had better, fellow soldiers, choose to die under 
our arms fighting, as it becomes men of courage, than surrender 



74 BRASILIANO SEIZES FLEET OF CANOES 

unto the Spaniards, who, in case they overcome us, will take 
away our lives with cruel torments. The Pirates were no more 
than 30 in number, who, notwithstanding, seeing their brave 
Commander oppose himself with courage unto the enemy, 
resolved to do the Hke. Hereupon they faced the troop of 
Spaniards, and discharged their muskets against them with 
such dexterity that they killed one horsemen with almost 
every shot. The fight continued for the space of an hour, till 
at last the Spaniards were put to flight by the Pirates. They 
stripped the dead, and took from them what they thought 
most convenient for their use. But such as were not already 
dead, they helped to quit the miseries of life with the ends of 
their muskets. 

Having vanquished the enemy, they all mounted on several 
horses they found in the field, and continued the journey 
aforementioned, Brasiliano having lost but two of his com- 
panions in this bloody fight, and had two others wounded. 
As they prosecuted their way, before they came unto the port 
they espied a boat from Campeche, well manned, that rode at 
anchor, protecting a small number of canoes that were lading 
wood. Hereupon they sent a detachment of six of their 
men to watch them ; and these the next morning by a wild 
[assault] possessed themselves of the canoes. Having given 
notice unto their companions, they went all on board, and with 
no great difficulty took also the boat, or little man-of-war, 
their convoy. Thus having rendered themselves masters of 
the whole fleet, they wanted only provisions, which they found 
but very small aboard those vessels. But this defect was 
supplied by the horses, which they instantly killed and salted 
with salt, which by good fortune the woodcutters had brought 
with them. Upon which victuals they made shift to keep 
themselves until such time as they could purchase better. 

These very same Pirates, I mean Brasiliano and his com- 
panions, took also another ship that was going from New 
Spain unto Maracaibo, laden with divers sorts of merchandize, 
and a very considerable number of pieces-of-eight, which were 
designed to buy coco-nuts for their lading home. All these 
prizes they carried into Jamaica, where they safely arrived, 
and, according to their custom, wasted in a few days in taverns 
and stews all they had gotten, by giving themselves to all 
manner of debauchery with strumpets and wine. Such of 



DEBAUCHERY OF THE BUCCANEERS 75 

these Pirates are found who will spend 2 or 3 thousand 
pieces-of-eight in one night, not leaving themselves peradven- 
ture a good shirt to wear on their backs in the morning. Thus 
upon a certain time I saw one of them give unto a common 
strumpet five hundred pieces-of-eight only that he might see 
her naked. My own master would buy, on hke occasions, 
a whole pipe of wine, and, placing it in the street, would force 
every one that passed by to drink with him ; threatening 
also to pistol them, in case they would not do it. At other 
times he would do the same with barrels of ale or beer. And, 
very often, with both his hands, he would throw these liquors 
about the streets, and wet the clothes of such as walked by, 
without regarding whether he spoiled their apparel or not, were 
they men or women. 

Among themselves, and to each other, these Pirates are 
extremely liberal and free. If any one of them has lost all 
his goods, which often happens in their manner of life, they 
freely give him, and make him partaker of what they have. In 
taverns and ale-houses they always have great credit ; but in 
such houses at Jamaica they ought not to run very deep in debt, 
seeing the inhabitants of that island do easily sell one another 
for debt. Thus it happened unto my patron, or master, to be 
sold for a debt of a tavern, wherein he had spent the greatest 
part of his money. This man had, within the space of three 
months before, 3000 pieces-of-eight in ready cash, all which 
he wasted in that short space of time, and became so poor as 
I have told you. 

But now to return to our discourse : I must let my reader 
know that BrasiHano, after having spent all that he had 
robbed, was constrained to go to sea again, to seek his fortune 
once more. Thus he set forth towards the coast of Campeche, 
his common place of rendezvous. Fifteen days after his 
arrival there, he put himself into a canoe, with intent to 
espy the port of that city, and see if he could rob any Spanish 
vessel. But his fortune was so bad that both he and all his 
men were taken prisoners, and carried into the presence of the 
Governor. This man immediately cast them into a dungeon, 
with full intention to hang them every person. And doubt- 
less he had performed his intent, were it not for a stratagem 
that Brasiliano used, which proved sufficient to save their lives. 
He wrote therefore a letter unto the Governor, making him 



^^ LEWIS SCOT; MANSVELT; J. DAVIS 

believe it came from other Pirates that were abroad at sea, and 
withal telling him : He should have a care how he used those 
persons he had in his custody. For in case he caused them any 
harm, they did swear unto him they would never give quarter to 
any person of the Spanish nation that should fall into their 
hands. 

Because these Pirates had been many times at Campeche, 
and in many other towns and villages of the West Indies 
belonging to the Spanish dominions, the Governor began to 
fear what mischief they might cause by means of their com- 
panions abroad, in case he should punish them. Hereupon 
he released them out of prison, exacting only an oath of them 
beforehand that they would leave their exercise of piracy for 
ever. And withal he sent them as common mariners, or pas- 
sengers in the galleons, to Spain. They got in this voyage 
altogether 500 pieces-of-eight, whereby they tarried not long 
there after their arrival. But, providing themselves with 
some few necessaries, they all returned unto Jamaica within 
a little while ; whence they set forth again to sea, committing 
greater robberies and cruelties than ever they had done 
before ; but more especially abusing the poor Spaniards that 
happened to fall into their hands, with all sorts of cruelty 
imaginable. 

y The Spaniards perceiving they could gain nothing upon 
this sort of people, nor diminish their number, which rather 
increased daily, resolved to diminish the number of their ships 
wherein they exercised trading to and fro. But neither was 
this resolution of any effect, or did them any good service. 
For the Pirates, finding not so many ships at sea as before, 
began to gather into greater companies and land upon the 
Spanish dominions, ruining whole cities, towns, and villages ; 
and withal pillaging, burning, and carrying away as much as 
they could [find] possible.^ 

The first Pirate who gave a beginning unto these invasions 
by land was named Lewis Scot, who sacked and pillaged the 
City of Campeche. He almost ruined the town, robbing and 
destroying all he could ; and, after he had put it to the ransom 
of an excessive sum of money, he left it. After Scot came 
another named Mansvelt, who enterprized to set footing in 
Granada, and penetrate with his piracies even unto the South 
Sea. Both which things he effected, till that at last, for want of 



I DAVIS* ATTACK ON NICARAGUA 77 

provision, he was constrained to go back. He assaulted tlie 
isle of Saint Catharine, which was the first land he took, and 
upon it some few prisoners. These showed him the way to- 
wards Cartagena, which is a principal city situate in the king- 
dom of New Granada. But the bold attempts and actions of 
John Davis, born at Jamaica, ought not to be forgotten in 
this history, as being some of the most remarkable thereof : 
especially his rare prudence and valour, wherewith he behaved 
himself in the aforementioned kingdom of Granada. This 
Pirate, having cruized a long time in the Gulf of Pocatauro 
upon the ships that were expected from Cartagena bound for 
Nicaragua, and not being able to meet any of the said ships, 
resolved at last to land in Nicaragua, leaving his ship con- 
cealed about the coast. 

This design he presently put in execution. For taking four- 
score men, out of four-score-and-ten which he had in all (the rest 
being left to keep the ship), he divided them equally into three 
canoes. His intent was to rob the churches, and rifle the houses 
of the chief citizens of the aforesaid town of Nicaragua. Thus, in 
the obscurity of the night, they mounted the river which leads 
to that city, rowing with oars in their canoes. By day they 
concealed themselves and boats under the branches of trees 
that were upon the banks. These grow very thick and intri- 
cate along the sides of the rivers in those countries, as also 
along the sea-coast. Under which, likewise, those who re- 
mained behind absconded their vessel, lest they should be 
seen either by fishermen or Indians. After this manner they 
arrived at the city the third night, where the sentry who kept 
the post of the river thought them to be fishermen that had been 
fishing in the lake. And as the greatest part of the Pirates are 
skilful in the Spanish tongue, so he never doubted thereof as 
soon as he heard them speak. They had in their company an 
Indian, who had run away from his master because he would 
make him a slave after having served him a long time. This 
Indian went first on shore, and, rushing at the sentry, he in- 
stantly killed him. Being animated with this success, they 
entered into the city, and went directly to three or four houses 
9f the chief est citizens, where they knocked with dissimulation. 
These, believing them to be friends, opened the doors, and the 
Pirates, suddenly possessing themselves of the houses, robbed 
all the money and plate they could find. Neither did they 



78 DAVIS RANSACKS SAINT AUGUSTINE 

spare the churches and most sacred things, all which were 
pillaged and profaned without any respect or veneration. 

In the meanwhile great cries and lamentation were heard 
about the town, of some who had escaped their hands ; by 
which means the whole city was brought into an uproar and 
alarm. Hence the whole number of citizens rallied together, 
intending to put themselves in defence. This being perceived 
by the Pirates, they instantly put themselves to flight, carry- 
ing with them all that they had robbed, and likewise some 
prisoners. These they led away, to the intent that, if any of 
them should happen to be taken by the Spaniards, they might 
make use of them for ransom. Thus they got unto their ship, 
and with all speed imaginable put out to sea, forcing the 
prisoners, before they would let them go, to procure them as 
much flesh as they thought necessary for their voyage to 
Jamaica. But, no sooner had they weighed anchor, when they 
saw on shore a troop of about five hundred Spaniards, all 
being very well armed, at the sea-side. Against these they let 
fly several guns, wherewith they forced them to quit the sands 
and retire towards home, with no small regret to see those 
Pirates carry away so much plate of their churches and houses, 
though distant at least 40 leagues from the sea. 
'Hrhese Pirates robbed on this occasion above 4000 pieces-of- 
eight in ready money, besides great quantities of plate uncoined 
and many j ewels . All which was computed to be worth the sum 
of 50,000 pieces-of-eight or more. With this great purchase 
they arrived at Jamaica soon after the exploit. But, as this sort 
of people are never masters of their money but a very little 
while, so were they soon constrained to seek more, by the 
same means they had used before. This adventure caused 
Captain John Davis, presently after his return, to be chosen 
Admiral of seven or eight boats of Pirates, he being now es- 
teemed by common consent an able conductor for such enter- 
prizes as these were. He began the exercise of this new 
command by directing his fleet towards the coasts of the north 
of Cuba, there to wait for the fleet which was to pass from New 
Spain. But, not being able to find anything by this design, 
they determined to go towards the coasts of Florida. Being 
arrived there, they landed part of their men, and sacked a 
small city named Saint Augustine of Florida, the castle ot 
which place had a garrison of 200 men, the which, notwith- 



END OF THE FIRST PART 79 

standing, could not prevent the pillage of the city, they effect- 
ing it without receiving the least damage from either soldiers 
or townsmen./ 

Hitherto we have spoken in the First Part of this book 
of the constitution of the islands of Hispaniola and Tortuga, 
their peculiarities and inhabitants ; as also of the fruits to be 
found in those countries. In the Second Part of this work 
we shall bend our discourse to describe the actions of two of 
the most famous Pirates, who committed many horrible 
crimes and inhuman cruelties against the Spanish nation. 



The End of ihe First Part 



PART II 

CHAPTER I 

Origin of Francis VOllonais, and beginning of his robberies 

/Francis L'Ollonais was native of that territory in France 
which is called Les Sables d'Ollone, or the Sands of OUone. 
In his youth he was transported to the Caribbee Islands, in 
quality of a servant or slave, according to the custom of France 
and other countries ; of which we have already spoken in the 
First Part of this book. Being out of his time, when he had 
obtained his freedom, he came into the isle of Hispaniola. 
Here he placed himself for some while among the hunters, 
before he began his robberies against the Spaniards, whereof 
I shall make mention at present, until his unfortunate death. 
At first he made two or three voyages in quality of a common 
mariner, wherein he behaved himself so courageously as to 
deserve the favour and esteem of the Governor of Tortuga, 
who was then Monsieur de la Place. Insomuch that this 
gentleman gave him a ship, and made him captain thereof, to 
the intent he might seek his fortune. This Dame shewed 
herself very favourable to him at the beginning, for in a short 
while he purchased great riches./But, withal, his cruelties 
against the Spaniards were such as that the very fame of them 
made him known through the whole Indies. For which rea- 
son the Spaniards, in his time, whensoever they were attacked 
by sea, would choose rather to die or sink fighting than surren- 
der, as knowing they should have no mercy nor quarter at his 
hands. But as Fortune is seldom constant, so after some time 
she turned her back unto him. The beginning of whose 
disasters was, that in a huge storm he lost his ship upon the 
coasts of Campeche. The men were all saved ; but, coming 
upon dry land, the Spaniards pursued them, and killed the 
greatest part, wounding also L'Ollonais, their captain. Not 
knowing how to escape, he thought to save his life by a strata- 
G 8i 



82 ESCAPE OF UOLLONAIS 

gem. Hereupon he took several handf uls of sand and mingled 
them with the blood of his own wounds, with which he be- 
smeared his face and other parts of his body. Then, hiding 
himself dexterously among the dead, he continued there till 
the Spaniards had quitted the field. 

After they were gone, he retired into the woods, and bound 
up his wounds as well as he could. These being by the help 
of nature pretty well healed, he took his way to the city of 
Campeche, having perfectly disguised himself in Spanish 
habit. Here he spoke with certain slaves, unto whom he 
promised their liberty in case they would obey him and trust 
in his conduct. They accepted his promises, and, stealing one 
night a canoe from one of their masters, they went to sea with 
the Pirate. The Spaniards in the meanwhile had made 
prisoner several of his companions, whom they kept in close 
dungeons in the city, while L'Ollonais went about the town 
and saw all that passed. These were often asked by the 
Spaniards : What is become of your Captain ?, unto whom 
they constantly answered : He is dead. With which news 
the Spaniards were hugely gladded, and made great 
demonstrations of joy, kindling bonfires, and, [like] as them 
that knew nothing to the contrary, giving thanks to God 
Almighty for their deliverance from such a cruel Pirate. 
L'Ollonais, having seen these joys for his death, made haste 
to escape with the slaves above-mentioned, and came safe to 
Tortuga, the common place of refuge of all sorts of wickedness, 
and the seminary, as it were, of all manner of Pirates and 
thieves. Though now his fortune was but low, yet he failed 
not of means to get another ship, which with craft and subtlety 
he obtained, and in it one-and-twenty persons. Being well 
provided with arms and other necessaries, he set forth towards 
the isle of Cuba, on the South side whereof lies a small village, 
which is called De los Cayos. The inhabitants of this town 
drive a great trade in tobacco, sugar, and hides — and all in 
boats, as not being able to make use of ships by reason of the 
little depth of that sea. 

L'Ollonais was greatly persuaded he should get here some 
considerable prey ; but, by the good fortune of some fishermen 
who saw him and the mercy of the Almighty, they escaped 
his t5Tannical hands. For the inhabitants of the town of 
Cayos despatched immediately a messenger overland unto 



L'OLLONAIS* CRUELTY 85 

Havana, complaining unto the Governor that L'Ollonais was 
come to destroy them, with two canoes. The Governor could 
very hardly be persuaded unto the truth of this story, seeing 
he had received letters from Campeche that he was dead. 
Notwithstanding, at the importunity of the petitioners he sent a 
ship to their relief, with 10 guns and fourscore-and-ten persons, 
well armed ; giving them withal this express command : 
They should not return unto his presence without having totally 
destroyed those Pirates. Unto this effect he gave them also a 
negro, who might serve them for a hangman ; his orders being 
that They should immediately hang every one of the said Pirates 
excepting L'Ollonais their Captain, whom they should bring 
alive unto Havana. This ship arrived at Cayos ; of whose 
coming the Pirates were advertised beforehand ; and, instead 
of flying, went to seek the said vessel in the river Estera, where 
she rode at anchor. The Pirates apprehended some fishermen, 
and forced them by night to shew the entry of the port, hoping 
soon to obtain a greater vessel than their two canoes, and 
thereby to mend their fortune. They arrived, after two 
o'clock in the morning, very nigh unto the ship. And the 
watch on board the ship asking them : Whence they came, 
and if they had seen any Pirates abroad, they caused one of the 
prisoners to answer : They had seen no Pirates, nor anything 
else. Which answer brought them into persuasion that they 
were fled away, having heard of their coming. 

But they experienced very soon the contrary ; for about 
break of day the Pirates began to assault the vessel on both 
sides with their two canoes. This attack they performed with 
such vigour that, although the Spaniards behaved themselves 
as they ought and made as good defence as they could, shooting 
against them likewise some great guns, yet they were forced to 
surrender, after being beaten by the Pirates, with swords in 
hand, down under the hatches. Hence L'Ollonais, com- 
manded them to be brought up one by one, and in this order 
caused their heads to be struck off. Among the rest came up 
the negro, designed to be the Pirates' executioner by the 
Governor of Havana. This fellow implored mercy at his 
hands very dolefully, desiring not to be killed, and telling 
L'Ollonais he was constituted hangman of that ship ; and that, 
in case he would spare him, he would tell him faithfully all 
that he should desire to know. L'Ollonais made him confess 



86 UOLLONAIS RETURNS TO TORTUGA 

as many things as he thought fit to ask him ; and, having done, 
commanded him to be murdered with the rest. -^Thus he 
cruelly and barbarously put them all to death, reserving of the 
whole number only one alive, whom he sent back to the 
Governor of Havana, with this message given him in writing : 
/ shall never henceforward give quarter to any Spaniard 
whatsoever ; and I have great hopes I shall execute on your 
own person the very same punishment I have done upon 
them you sent against me. Thus I have retaliated the kindness 
you designed unto me and my companio7is. The Governor 
was much troubled to understand these sad and withal insolent 
news ; which occasioned him to swear, in the presence of many, 
he would never grant quarter unto any Pirate that should fall 
into his hands. But the citizens of Havana desired him not to 
persist in the execution of that rash and rigorous oath, seeing 
the Pirates would certainly take occasion thence to do the same ; 
and they had an hundred times more opportunity of revenge 
than he : that, being necessitated to get their livelihood by fishery, 
they should hereafter always be in danger of losing their lives. 
By these reasons he was persuaded to bridle his anger, and 
remit the severity of his oath aforementioned.^ 

Now L'Ollonais had got himself a good ship, but withal 
very few provisions and people in it. Hereupon, to purchase 
both the one and the other, he resolved to use his customary 
means of cruizing from one port to another. Thus he did for 
some while, till at last, not being able to purchase anything, he 
determined to go unto the port of Maracaibo. Here he took 
by surprize a ship that was laden with plate and other merchan- 
dize, being outward bound to buy cacao-nuts. With these 
prizes he returned unto Tortuga, where he was received with no 
small joy by the inhabitants, they congratulating his happy 
success and their own private interest. He continued not 
long there, but pitched upon new designs of equipping a whole 
fleet, sufficient to transport 500 men, with all other necessaries. 
With these preparations he resolved to go unto the Spanish 
dominions, and pillage both cities, towns, and villages, and 
finally take Maracaibo itself. For this purpose, he knew the 
island of Tortuga would afford him many resolute and cour- 
ageous men, very fit for such enterprizes. Besides that, he 
had in his service several prisoners, who were exactly acquainted 
with the ways and places he designed upon. 



CHAPTER II 

VOllonais equips a fleet to land upon the Spanish islands of 
America, with intent to rob, sack, and hum whatever he meets 

^F this his design L'Ollonais gave notice unto all the Pirates 
who at that conjuncture of time were either at home or abroad ; 
by which means he got together in a little while above 400 
men. Besides which, there was at that present in the isle of 
Tortuga another Pirate, whose name was Michael de Basco. 
This man by his piracy had gotten riches sufficient to live at 
ease and go no more abroad to sea ; having withal the office 
of Major of the island. Yet, seeing the great preparations 
that L'Ollonais made for this expedition, he entered into a 
straight league of friendship with him, and proffered unto him 
that, in case he would make him his chief Captain by land 
(seeing he knew the country very well and all its avenues), he 
would take part in his fortunes, and go along with him. They 
both agreed upon articles, with great joy of L'Ollonais, as 
knowing that Basco had performed great actions in Europe, 
and had gained the repute of a good soldier. He gave him, 
therefore, the command he desired, and the conduct of all his 
people by land. Thus they all embarked in eight vessels, that 
of L'Ollonais being the greatest, as having ten guns of in- 
different^ carriage. • 

All things being in readiness, and the whole company on 
board, they set sail together about the end of April, having a 
considerable number of men for those parts, that is in all six- 
hundred and-threescore persons. They directed their course 
towards that part which is called Bayala, situated on the North 
side of the island of Hispaniola. Here they also took into 
their company a certain number of French hunters, who volun- 
tarily offered themselves to go along with them. And here 
likewise they provided themselves with victuals and other 
necessaries for that voyage. 

* Here in the seme of ' unimportant ', ' ordinary ' ; cf . Shakespeare, 
Taming of the Shrew, I, ii, 181 : ' Their garters of an indifferent knit.' 

87 



88 TAKES TWO SPANISH SHIPS 

Hence they set sail again the last day of July, and steered 
directly towards the Eastern Cape of the isle called Punta 
d'Espada. Hereabouts they suddenly espied a ship that was 
coming from Porto Rico and bound for New Spain, being laden 
with coco-nuts. L'Ollonais, the Admiral, presently commanded 
the rest of the fleet they should wait for him nigh unto the 
isle of Savona, situate on the Eastern side of Cape Punta 
d'Espada, forasmuch as he alone intended to go and take the 
said vessel. The Spaniards, although they had been in sight 
now full two hours, and knew them to be Pirates, yet they 
would not flee, but rather prepared to fight, as being well 
armed, and provided of all things necessary thereunto. Thus 
the combat began between L'Ollonais and the Spanish vessel, 
which lasted three hours ; and, these being past, they sur- 
rendered unto him. This ship was mounted with i6 guns, and 
had 50 fighting men on board. Theyfound in her 120,000 weight 
of cacao, 40,000 pieces-of-eight, and the value of 10,000 more 
in jewels. L'Ollonais sent the vessel presently unto Tortuga 
to be unladed, with orders to return with the said ship as 
soon as possible to the isle of Savona, where he would 
wait for their coming. In the meanwhile the rest of the 
fleet, being arrived at the said island of Savona, met with 
another Spanish vessel that was coming from Comana with 
military provisions unto the isle of Hispaniola, and also with 
money to pay the garrisons of the said island. This vessel 
also they took without any resistance, although mounted with 
eight guns. Here were found seven thousand- weight of 
powder, great number of muskets and other things of this 
kind together, with 12,000 pieces-of-eight in ready money. 

These forementioned events gave good encouragement unto 
the Pirates, as judging them very good beginnings unto the 
business they had in hand, especially finding their fleet pretty 
well recruited within a little while. For, the first ship that 
was taken being arrived at Tortuga, the Governor ordered to 
be instantly unladen, and soon after sent her back with fresh 
provisions and other necessaries unto L'Ollonais. This ship 
he chose for his own, and gave that which he commanded unto 
his comrade Antony du Puis. Thus having received new 
recruits of men, in Heu of them he had lost in taking the prizes 
above-mentioned and by sickness, he found himself in a good 
condition to prosecute his voyage. All being well animated 



L'OLLONAIS SAILS FOR MARACAIBO 89 

and full of courage, they set sail for Maracaibo, which port is 
situated in the province of New Venezuela, in the latitude of 
twelve degrees and some minutes North. This island is in 
length twenty leagues, and twelve in breadth. Unto this 
port also belong the islands of Onega and Monges. The East 
side thereof is called Cape St Roman, and the Western side 
Cape of Caquibacoa. The gulf is called by some the Gulf 
of Venezuela, but the Pirates usually call it the Bay of 
Maracaibo. 

At the beginning of this gulf are two islands, which extend 
for the greatest part from East to West. That [which] lies 
towards the East is called Isla de las Vigilias, or the Watch 
Isle, because in the middle thereof is to be seen a high hill, upon 
which stands a house wherein dwells perpetually a watchman. 
The other is called Isla de las Palomas, or the Isle of Pigeons. 
Between these two islands runs a little sea, or rather a lake, of 
fresh water, being three-score leagues in length and 30 in 
breadth ; which disgorges into the ocean, and dilates itself 
about the two islands aforementioned. Between them is 
found the best passage for ships, the channel of this passage 
being no broader than the flight of a great gun of eight pound 
carriage, more or less. Upon the Isle of Pigeons stands a 
castle to impede the entry of any vessels ; all such as will 
come in being necessitated to approach very nigh unto the 
castle, by reason of two banks of sand that lie on the other 
side, with only 14 foot water. Many other banks of sand are 
also found in this lake, as that which is called El Tablazo, or 
The Great Table, which is no deeper than ten foot ; but this 
lies forty leagues within the lake. Others there are that are no 
more than 6, 7, or 8 foot in depth. All of them are very 
dangerous, especially unto such mariners as are little ac- 
quainted with this lake. On the West side hereof is situated 
the city of Maracaibo, being very pleasant to the view, by 
reason its houses are built along the shore, having delicate 
prospects everywhere round about. The city may possibly 
contain three or four thousand persons, the slaves being 
included in this number ; all which do make a town of a 
reasonable bigness. Among these are judged to be eight 
hundred persons, more or less, able to bear arms, all of them 
Spaniards. Here are also one Parish Church, of very good 
fabric and well adorned, four monasteries, and one hospital. 



90 THE ISLAND OF BORRICA 

The city is governed by a Deputy-Governor, who is sub- 
stituted here by the Governor of Caracas, as being his depen- 
dency. The commerce or trading here exercised consists for 
the greatest part in hides and tobacco. The inhabitants 
possess great numbers of cattle and many plantations, 
which extend for the space of thirty leagues within the country, 
especially on that side that looks towards the great and 
populous town of Gibraltar. At which place are gathered 
huge quantities of cacao-nuts, and all other sorts of garden- 
fruits, which greatly serve for the regalement and sustenance 
of the inhabitants of Maracaibo, whose territories are much 
drier than those of Gibraltar. Unto this place those of 
Maracaibo send great quantities of flesh ; they making returns 
in oranges, lemons, and several other fruits. For the in- 
habitants of Gibraltar have great scarcity of provisions of 
flesh, their fields being not capable of feeding cows or sheep. 

Before the city of Maracaibo lies a very spacious and secure 
port, wherein may be built all sort of vessels ; as having 
great convenience of timber, which may be transported thither 
at very little charge. Nigh unto the town lies also a small 
island called Borrica, which serves them to feed great numbers 
of goats, of which cattle the inhabitants of Maracaibo make 
greater use of their skins than their flesh or milk ; they mak- 
ing no great account of these two, unless while they are as yet 
but tender and young kids. In the fields about the town are 
fed some numbers of sheep, but of a very small size. In some 
of the islands that belong unto the lake, and in other places 
hereabouts, do inhabit many savage Indians, whom the 
Spaniards call bravos, or Wild. These Indians could never 
agree as yet, nor be reduced to any accord with the Spaniards, 
by reason of their brutish and untamable nature. They dwell 
for the most part towards the Western side of the lake, in 
little huts that are built upon trees which grow in the water, 
the cause hereof being only to exempt themselves as much as 
possible from the innumerable quantity of mosquitos or gnats 
that infest those parts, and by which they are tormented night 
and day. Towards the East side of the said lake are also to 
be seen whole towns of fishermen, who likewise are con- 
strained to live in huts, built upon trees, like unto the former. 
Another reason of thus dwelling is the frequent inundations 
of waters ; for, after great rains, the land is often overflowed 



GIBRALTAR; MERIDA 91 

for the space of 2 or 3 leagues, there being no less than five- 
and-twenty great rivers that feed this lake. The town of 
Gibraltar is also frequently drowned by these inundations, 
insomuch that the inhabitants are constrained to leave their 
houses and retire unto their plantations. 

Gibraltar is situated at the side of the lake, forty leagues or 
thereabouts within it, and receives its necessary provisions 
of flesh, as has been said, from Maracaibo. The town is 
inhabited by 1500 persons, more or less, whereof 400 may be 
capable of bearing arms. The greatest part of the inhabitants 
keep open shops, wherein they exercise one mechanic trade or 
other. All the adjacent fields about this town are cultivated 
with numerous plantations of sugar and cacao, in which are 
many tall and beautiful trees, of whose timber houses may be 
built, and also ships. Among these trees are found great 
store of handsome and proportionable cedars, being seven or 
eight foot in circumference, which serve there very commonly 
to build boats and ships. These they build after such 
manner as to bear one only great sail ; and such vessels 
are called piraguas. The whole country round about is 
sufficiently furnished with rivers and brooks, which are 
very useful to the inhabitants in time of droughts, they 
opening in that occasion many little channels, through which 
they lead the rivulets to water their fields and plantations. 
They plant in like manner great quantity of tobacco, which 
is much esteemed in Europe ; and for its goodness is called 
there Tahaco de Sacerdotes, or Priests' Tobacco. They enjoy 
nigh twenty leagues of jurisdiction, which is bounded and 
defended by very high mountains that are perpetually covered 
with snow. On the other side of these mountains is situated 
a great city called Merida, unto which the town of Gibraltar 
is subject. All sort of merchandize is carried from this 
town unto the aforesaid city upon mules ; and that but at one 
season of the year, by reason of the excessive cold endured in 
those high mountains. Upon the said mules great returns 
are made in flour of meal, which comes from towards Peru by 
the way of Estaffe. 

Thus far I thought it convenient to make a short descrip- 
tion of the aforesaid lake of Maracaibo, and its situation ; to 
the intent my reader might the better be enabled to compre- 
hend what I shall say concerning what was acted by the 



92 L'OLLONAIS CAPTURES THE FORT 

Pirates in this place, the history whereof I shall presently 
begin. 

As soon as L'OUonais arrived at the Gulf of Venezuela, he 
cast anchor with his whole fleet, out of sight of the watch- 
tower of the island of Vigilias, or Watch Isle. The next day, 
very early, he set sail hence, with all his ships, for the lake of 
Maracaibo ; where, being arrived, they cast anchor the second 
time. Soon after, they landed all their men, with design to 
attack in the first place the castle or fortress that commanded 
the bar, and is therefore called De la Barra. This fort consists 
only of several great baskets of earth, placed upon a rising 
ground, upon which are planted sixteen great guns, with several 
other heaps of earth round about, for covering the men within. 
The Pirates, having landed at a distance of a league from this 
fort, began to advance by degrees towards it. But the 
Governor thereof, having espied their landing, had placed an 
ambuscade of some of his men, with design to cut them off 
behind, while he meant to attack them in the front. This 
ambuscade was found out by the Pirates ; and, hereupon 
getting before, they assaulted and defeated it so entirely that 
not one man could retreat unto the castle. This obstacle 
being removed, L'OUonais with all his companions advanced 
in great haste towards the fort. And after a fight of almost 
three hours, wherein they behaved themselves with desperate 
courage, such as this sort of people are used to show, they 
became masters thereof, having made use of no other arms than 
their swords and pistols. And, while they were fighting, 
those who were routed in the ambuscade, not being able to get 
into the castle, retired towards the city of Maracaibo in great 
confusion and disorder, crying : The Pirates will presently 
he here with two-thousand meji and more. This city, having 
formerly been taken by such kind of people as these were, 
and sacked even to the remotest corners thereof, pre- 
served still in its memory a fresh idea of that misery. Here- 
upon, as soon as they heard this dismal news, they endeavoured 
to escape as fast as they could towards Gibraltar in their boats 
and canoes, carrying with them all the goods and money they 
could. Being come to Gibraltar, they dispersed the rumours 
that the fortress was taken, and that nothing had been saved, 
nor any person able to escape the fury of the Pirates. 

The castle being taken by the Pirates, as was said before, 



PIRATES MARCH INTO MARACAIBO 93 

they presently made sign unto the ships of the victory they 
had obtained, to the end they should come farther in, without 
apprehension of any danger. The rest of that day was spent 
in ruining and demolishing the said castle. They nailed the 
guns, and burnt as much as they could not carry away ; bury- 
ing also the dead, and sending on board the fleet such as were 
wounded. The next day very early in the morning they 
weighed anchor, and directed their course all together towards 
the city of Maracaibo, distant only 6 leagues more or less from 
the fort. But the wind being very scarce, that day they 
could advance but little, as being forced to expect the 
flowing of the tide. The next morning they came within 
sight of the town, and began to make preparations for landing 
under the protection of their own guns, being persuaded the 
Spaniards might have laid an ambuscade among the trees and 
woods. Thus they put their men into canoes, which for that 
purpose they brought with them, and landed where they 
thought most convenient, shooting in the meanwhile very 
furiously with their great guns. Of the people that were in 
the canoes, half only went on shore ; the other half re- 
mained on board the said canoes. They fired with their 
guns from the ships as fast as was possible towards the woody 
part of the shore ; but could see, and were answered by, 
nobody. Thus they marched in good order into the town, 
whose inhabitants, as I told you before, were all retired into 
the woods, and towards Gibraltar, with their wives, children, 
and families. Their houses they left well provided with all 
sort of victuals, such as flour, bread, pork, brandy, wines, and 
good store of poultry. With these things the Pirates fell to 
banqueting and making good cheer ; for in four weeks before 
they had had no opportunity of filling their stomachs with 
such plenty. 

They instantly possessed themselves of the best houses in 
the town, and placed sentries everywhere they thought 
convenient. The great church served them for their main 
corps du garde. The next day they sent a body of 160 men 
to find out some of the inhabitants of the town, whom they 
understood were hidden in the woods not far thence. These 
returned that very night, bringing with them 20,000 pieces-of- 
eight, several mules laden with household goods and merchan- 
dize, and 20 prisoners, between men, women, and children. 



94 PIRATES PROCEED TO GIBRALTAR 

Some of these prisoners were put to the rack, only to make 
them confess where they had hidden the rest of their goods ; 
but they could extort very little from them. L'OUonais, 
who never used to make any great account of murdering, 
though in cold blood, ten or twelve Spaniards, drew his 
cutlass and hacked one to pieces in the presence of all the 
rest, saying : If you do not confess and declare where you have 
hidden the rest of your goods, I will do the like to all your com- 
panions. At last, amongst these horrible cruelties and in- 
human threats, one was found who promised to conduct him 
and show the place where the rest of the Spaniards were hidden. 
But those that were fled, having intelligence that one had 
discovered their lurking holes unto the Pirates, changed place, 
and buried all the remnant of their riches underground, inso- 
much that the Pirates could not find them out, unless some 
other person of their own party should reveal them. Besides 
that, the Spaniards, flying from one place to another every 
day and often changing woods, were jealous even of each 
other, insomuch as the father scarce presumed to trust his 
own son. 

Finally, after that the Pirates had been fifteen days in 
Maracaibo, they resolved to go towards Gibraltar. But the 
inhabitants of this place, having received intelligence thereof 
beforehand, as also that they intended afterwards to go to 
Merida, gave notice of this design to the Governor thereof, who 
was a valiant soldier and had served his king in Flanders in 
many military offices. His answer was : He would have 
them take no care ; for he hoped in a little while to exterminate 
the said Pirates. Whereupon he transferred himself immedi- 
ately unto Gibraltar, with 400 men well armed, ordering at 
the same time the inhabitants of the said town to put them- 
selves in arms ; so that in all he made a body of 800 fighting 
men. With the same speed he commanded a battery to be 
raised towards the sea, whereon he mounted 20 guns, covering 
them all with great baskets of earth. Another battery like- 
wise he placed in another place, mounted with 8 guns. After 
this was done, he barricaded a highway or narrow passage 
into the town, through which the Pirates of necessity ought 
to pass ; opening at the same time another, through much 
dirt and mud, in the wood, which was totally unknown to the 
Pirates. 



THE PIRATES ATTACK GIBRALTAR 95 

The Pirates, not knowing an5rthing of these preparations, 
having embarked all their prisoners and what they had robbed, 
took their way towards Gibraltar. Being come within sight 
of the place, they perceived the Royal standard hanging forth, 
and that those of the town had a mind to fight and defend 
their houses. L'Ollonais, seeing this resolution, called a 
council of war, to deliberate what he ought to do in such case ; 
propounding withal unto his officers and marines, that the 
difficulty of such an enterprize was very great, seeing the 
Spaniards had had so much time to put themselves in a posture 
of defence, and had gotten a good body of men together, with 
many martial provisions. But notwithstanding, said he, have 
a good courage. We must either defend ourselves like good 
soldiers, or lose our lives with all the riches we have gotten. Do 
as I shall do, who am your Captain. At other times we have 
fought with fewer men than we have in our company at present, 
and yet we have overcome greater numbers than there possibly 
can be in this town. The more they are, the more glory we shall 
attribute unto our fortune, and the greater riches we shall increase 
unto it. The Pirates were under this suspicion, that all those 
riches which the inhabitants of Maracaibo had absconded, were 
transported unto Gibraltar, or at least the greatest part thereof. 
After this speech, they all promised to follow him and obey 
very exactly his commands. Unto whom L'Ollonais made 
answer : 'Tis well ; but know ye withal that the first man who 
shall show any fear, or the least apprehension thereof, I will 
pistol him with my own hands. 

With this resolution they cast anchor nigh the shore, at 
the distance of one quarter of a league from the town. The 
next day, before sunrising, they were all landed, being to the 
number of three-hundred-and-four-score men, well provided, 
and armed every one with a cutlass and one or two pistols ; 
and withal sufficient powder and bullet for 30 charges. Here, 
upon the shore, they all shook hands with one another in 
testimony of good courage, and began their march, L'Ollonais 
speaking these words to them : Come, my brothers, follow me, 
and have a good courage. They followed their way with a 
guide they had provided. But he, believing he led them well, 
brought them to the way which the Governor had obstructed 
with barricades. Through this not being able to pass, they 
went unto the other which was newly made in the wood among 



96 THE PIRATES' STRATAGEM 

the mire, unto which the Spaniards could shoot at pleasure. 
Notwithstanding, the Pirates, being full of courage, cut down 
multitude of branches of trees, and threw them in the dirt 
upon the way, to the end they might not stick so fast in it. 
In the meanwhile, those of Gibraltar fired at them with their 
great guns so furiously that they could scarce hear or see one 
another through the noise and smoke. Being now past the 
wood, they came upon firm ground, where they met with a 
battery of 6 guns, which immediately the Spaniards discharged 
against them, all being loaded with small bullets and pieces of 
iron. After this, the Spaniards, sallying forth, set upon them 
with such fury as caused the Pirates to give way and retire, 
very few of them daring to advance towards the fort. They 
continued still firing against the Pirates, of whom they had 
already killed and wounded many. This made them go back 
to seek some other way through the middle of the wood ; but, 
the Spaniards having cut down many trees to hinder the pass- 
age, they could find none, and thus were forced to return unto 
that they had left. Here the Spaniards continued to fire as 
before ; neither would they sally out of their batteries to attack 
the Pirates any more. Hereby L'OUonais and his companions, 
not being able to grimp^ up the baskets of earth, were compelled 
to make use of an old stratagem — wherewith at last they 
deceived and overcame the Spaniards. 

L'OUonais retired suddenly with all his men, making show 
as if he fled. Hereupon the Spaniards, crying out : They flee, 
they flee ; let us follow them, sallied forth with great disorder, to 
pursue the fugitive Pirates. After they had drawn them 
some distance from their batteries, which was their only 
design, they turned upon them, unexpectedly with swords in 
hand, and killed above two hundred men. And thus fighting 
their way through those who remained alive, they possessed 
themselves of the batteries. The Spaniards that remained 
abroad gave themselves up for lost, and consequently took 
their flight unto the woods. The other part that was in the 
battery of eight guns surrendered themselves upon conditions 

^ French griniper, to climb, cause to mount, raise. Grymp is used in 
St Brandan, p. 20, in the sense of to ' grip ' : Halliwell [Diet, of Archaic 
Words) suggests a possible misprint. Mr. Grant Allen uses the word in 
his Scallywag [1893], i, 44 : " How the little beasts grimp . . . such 
plucky little beggars, and so strong for their size 1 " 



THE PIRATES IN GIBRALTAR 97 

of obtaining quarter for their lives. The Pirates, being now 
become masters of the whole town, pulled down the Spanish 
colours, and set up their own, taking prisoners at the same time 
as many as they could find. These they carried unto the 
great church, whither also they transferred many great guns, 
wherewith they raised a battery to defend themselves, fearing 
lest the Spaniards that were fled should rally more of their own 
party and come upon them again. But the next day, after 
they were all fortified, all their fears disappeared. They 
gathered all the dead, with intent to allow them burial, finding 
the number of above 500 Spaniards killed, besides those that 
were wounded within the town and those that died of their 
wounds in the woods, where they sought for refuge. Besides 
which, the Pirates had in their custody above 150 prisoners, 
and nigh 500 slaves, many women and children. 

Of their own companions the Pirates found only forty dead, 
and almost as many more wounded. Whereof the greatest 
part died afterwards, through the constitution of the air, 
which brought fevers and other accidents upon them. They 
put all the Spaniards that were slain into two great boats, 
and carrying them one-quart er-of-a-league within the sea, 
they sank the boats. These things being done, they gathered 
all the plate, household stuff, and merchandize they could rob 
or thought convenient to carry away. But the Spaniards who 
had anything as yet left unto them, hid it very carefully. 
Soon after, the Pirates, as if they were unsatisfied with the 
great riches they had gotten, began to seek for more goods and 
merchandize, not sparing those who lived in the fields, such as 
hunters and planters. They had scarce been eighteen days 
upon the place, when the greatest part of the prisoners they had 
taken died of hunger. For in the town very few provisions, 
especially of flesh, were to be found. Howbeit, they had some 
quantity of flour of meal, although perhaps something less than 
what was sufficient. But this the Pirates had taken into their 
custody to make bread for themselves. As to the swine, cows, 
sheep, and poultry that were found upon the place, they took 
them likewise for their own sustenance, without allowing any 
share thereof unto the poor prisoners. For these they only 
provided some small quantity of mules' and asses' flesh, which 
they killed for that purpose. And such as could not eat of 
that loathsome provision were constrained to die of hunger, as 



98 THE PIRATES IN GIBRALTAR 

many did, their stomachs not being accustomed to such unusual 
sustenance. Only some women were found, who were allowed 
better cheer by the Pirates, because they served them in their 
sensual dehghts, unto which those robbers are hugely given. 
Among those women, some had been forced, others were volun- 
teers ; though almost all had rather taken up that vice through 
poverty and hunger more than any other cause. Of the 
prisoners many also died under the torments they sustained, to 
make them confess where they had hidden their money or jewels. 
And of these, some, because they had none nor knew of none, 
and others for denying what they knew, endured such horrible 
deaths. 

Finally, after having been in possession of the town four 
entire weeks, they sent four of the prisoners remaining alive 
unto the Spaniards that were fled into the woods, demanding 
of them a ransom for not burning the town. The sum hereof 
they constituted 10,000 pieces-of-eight, which, unless it were 
sent unto them, they threatened to fire and reduce into ashes 
the whole village. For bringing in of this money they allowed 
them only the space of two days. These being past, and the 
Spaniards not having been able to gather so punctually such 
a sum, the Pirates began to set fire to many places of the town. 
Thus the inhabitants, perceiving the Pirates to be in earnest, 
begged of them tohelp to extinguish the fire ; and withal promised 
the ransom should be readily paid. The Pirates condescended 
to their petition, helping as much as they could to stop the 
progress of the fire. Yet, though they used the best endeavours 
they possibly could, one part of the town was ruined, especially 
the church belonging to the monastery, which was burnt even 
to dust. After they had received the sum above-mentioned, 
they carried on board their ships all the riches they had robbed, 
together with a great number of slaves which had not as yet 
paid their ransom. For all the prisoners had sums of money set 
upon them, and the slaves were also commanded to be re- 
deemed. Hence they returned to Maracaibo, where being 
arrived they found a general consternation in the whole city. 
Unto which they sent three or four prisoners to tell the gover- 
nor and inhabitants : They should bring them 30,000 pieces-of- 
eight on hoard their ships, for a ransom of their houses ; other- 
wise they should be entirely sacked anew and burnt. 

Among these debates a certain party of Pirates came on 



THE PIRATES DIVIDE THE SPOILS 99 

shore to rob, and these carried away the images, the pictures, 
and bells of the great church, on board the fleet. The Span- 
iards, who were sent to demand of those who were fled the sum 
aforementioned, returned with orders to make some agree- 
ment with the Pirates. This they performed, and concluded 
with the Pirates they would give for their ransom and liberty 
the sum of 20,000 pieces-of-eight and 500 cows. The con- 
dition hereof being that they should commit no farther acts 
of hostility against any person, but should depart thence 
presently after pajmient of the money and cattle. The one 
and the other being delivered, they set sail with the whole fleet, 
causing great joy unto the inhabitants of Maracaibo to see 
themselves quit of this sort of people. Notwithstanding, three 
days after they resumed their fears and admiration, seeing the 
Pirates to appear again and re-enter the port they had left 
with all their ships. But these apprehensions soon vanished, 
by only hearing one of the Pirates' errand, who came on shore to 
tell them from L'OUonais : They should send him a skilful Pilot 
to conduct one of his greatest ships over the dangerous bank that 
lies at the entry of the lake. Which petition, or rather command, 
was instantly granted. 

/The Pirates had now been full two months in those towns, 
wherein they committed those cruel and insolent actions we 
have told you of. Departing therefore thence, they took their 
course towards the island Hispaniola, and arrived thither in 
eight days, casting anchor in a port called Isla de la Vaca, or 
Cow Island. This isle is inhabited by French Buccaneers, 
who most commonly sell the flesh they hunt unto Pirates and 
others who now and then put in there with intent of victualling 
or trading with them. Here they unladed the whole car- 
gazons^ of riches they had robbed — the usual storehouse of the 
Pirates being commonly under the shelter of the Buccaneers. 
Here also they made a dividend amongst them of all their 
prizes and gains, according to that order and degree which 
belonged unto every one, as hath been mentioned above. 
Having cast up the account and made exact calculation of all 
they had purchased, they found in ready money 260,000 pieces- 
of-eight. Whereupon, this being divided, every one received 

* Spanish for cargo : cf. " There should come in euery ship the 
fourth part of her cargason in money" — Hakluyt, Voyages [1583], 
vol. II, i, p. 246. (Arber's English Garner, vol. iii, p. 172.) 



loo PIRATES RETURN TO TORTUGA 

to his share in money, and also in pieces of silk, linen, and other 
commodities, the value of above loo pieces-of-eight. Those 
who had been wounded in this expedition received their part 
before all the rest ; I mean, such recompenses as I spoke of in 
the First Book, for the loss of their limbs which many sustained. 
Afterwards they weighed all the plate that was uncoined, 
reckoning after the rate of lo pieces-of-eight for every pound. 
The jewels were prized with much variety, either at too high 
or too low rates ; being thus occasioned by their own ignor- 
ance. This being done, every one was put to his oath again 
that he had not concealed anything nor substracted from the 
common stock. Hence they proceeded to the dividend of 
what shares belonged to such as were dead amongst them, 
either in battle or otherwise. These shares were given to their 
friends to be kept entire for them, and to be delivered in due 
time unto their nearest relations, or whomsoever should appear 
to be their lawful heirs. .^ 

The whole dividend being entirely finished, they set sail 
thence for the isle of Tortuga. Here they arrived one month 
after, to the great joy of most that were upon the island. For, 
as to the common Pirates, in three weeks they had scarce any 
money left them, having spent it all in things of httle value, or 
at play either of cards or dice. Here also arrived, not long 
before them, two French ships laden with wine and brandy 
and other things of this kind ; whereby these liquors, at the 
arrival of the Pirates, were sold indifferent cheap. But this 
lasted not long ; for soon after they were enhanced extremely, 
a gallon of brandy being sold for 4 pieces-of-eight. The 
Governor of the island bought of the Pirates the whole cargo 
of the ship laden with cacao, giving them for that rich com- 
modity scarce the twentieth part of what it was worth. Thus 
they made shift to lose and spend the riches they had got in 
much less time than they were purchased by robbing. The 
taverns and stews, according to the custom of Pirates, 
got the greatest part thereof, insomuch that soon after they 
were constrained to seek more by the same unlawful means 
they had obtained the preceding. 



CHAPTER III 

L'Ollonais makes new preparations to take the city of St James 
dc Leon ; as also that of Nicaragua, where he miserably 
perishes 

L'Ollonais had got himself very great esteem and repute at 
Tortuga by this last voyage, by reason he brought them home 
such considerable profit. And now he needed take no great 
care how to gather men to serve under his colours, seeing more 
came in voluntarily to proffer their service unto him than he 
could employ, every one reposing such great confidence in his 
conduct for seeking their fortunes that they judged it a 
matter of the greatest security imaginable to expose them- 
selves in his company to the hugest dangers that might possibly 
occur. He resolved, therefore, for a second voyage, to go with 
his officers and soldiers towards the parts of Nicaragua, and 
pillage there as many towns as he could meet. 

Having published his new preparations, he had all his men 
together at the time appointed, being about the number of 
700, more or less. Of these he put 300 on board the ship he 
took at Maracaibo, and the rest in other vessels of lesser 
burden, which were five more ; so that the whole number were 
in all six ships. The first port they went unto was in the 
island of Hispaniola, to a place called Bayala, where they 
determined to victual the fleet and take in provisions. This 
being done, they set sail thence, and steered their course to a 
port called Matamana, lying on the South side of the isle of 
Cuba. Their intent was to take here all the canoes they could 
meet, these coasts being frequented by a huge number of fisher- 
men of tortoises, who carry them thence unto Havana. They 
took as many of the said canoes, to the great grief of those 
miserable people, as they thought necessary for their designs. 
For they had great necessity of these small bottoms, by reason 
the port whither they designed to go was not of depth sufficient 



I02 REACHES PUERTO CAVALLO 

to bear ships of any burden. Hence they took their course 
towards the cape called Gracias k Dios, situate upon the 
continent in latitude fifteen degrees North, at the distance of 
one hundred leagues from the island De los Pinos. But, being 
out at sea, they were taken with a sad and tedious calm, and by 
the agitation of the waves alone were thrown into the Gulf of 
Honduras. Here they laboured very much to regain what 
they had lost, but all in vain ; both the waters in their course 
and the winds being contrary to their endeavours. Besides 
that, the ship wherein L'Ollonais was embarked could not 
follow the rest ; and, what was worse, they wanted already 
provisions. Hereupon they were forced to put into the first 
port or bay they could reach, to revictual their fleet. Thus 
they entered with their canoes into a river called Xagua, 
inhabited by Indians, whom they totally robbed and destroyed ; 
they finding amongst their goods great quantity of millet, 
many hogs and hens. Not contented with what they had done, 
they determined to remain there until the bad weather was 
over, and to pillage all the towns and villages lying along the 
coast of the gulf. Thus they passed from one place to another, 
seeking as yet more provisions, by reason they had not what 
they wanted for the accomplishment of their designs. Having 
searched and rifled many vilages, where they found no great 
matter, they came at last to Puerto Cavallo. In this port 
the Spaniards have two several storehouses, which serve 
to keep the merchandize that are brought from the inner parts 
of the country until the arrival of the ships. There was in the 
port at that occasion a Spanish ship mounted with four-and- 
twenty guns and sixteen pedreros'^ or mortar-pieces. This 
ship was immediately seized by the Pirates ; and then, drawing 
nigh the shore, they landed and burnt the two storehouses, 
with all the rest of the houses belonging to the place. Many 
inhabitants likewise they took prisoners and committed upon 
them the most insolent and inhuman cruelties that ever 
heathens invented, putting them to the cruellest tortures 
they could imagine or devise. It was the custom of L'Ollonais 

1 Pedrero (Spanish), a swivel-gun, used for firing off stones, scraps of 
iron, etc. Cf. Barrgt, Theorie of Warres [1598]: 'the cannon and 
double cannon ; the Pedrera, Basilisco, and such like.' Anglicized as 
Patarcro. Cf. Angelo and Carli, Congo [1700 ; in Pinkerton's Voyages. 
XVI, p. 180] : ' The ship carried fifty guns, four-and-twenty patare- 
roes, and other necessaries,' 



L'OLLONAIS* INHUMANITIES 103 

that, having tormented any persons and they not confessing, 
he would instantly cut them in pieces with his anger, and pull 
out their tongues ; desiring to do the same, if possible, to 
every Spaniard in the world. Oftentimes it happened that 
some of these miserable prisoners, being forced thereunto by 
the rack, would promise to discover the places where the 
fugitive Spaniards lay hidden ; which being not able afterwards 
to perform, they were put to more enormous and cruel deaths 
than they who were dead before. 

The prisoners being all dead and annihilated (excepting 
only two, whom they reserved to show them what they 
desired), they marched hence to the town of San Pedro, or 
St Peter, distant 10 or 12 leagues from Puerto Cavallo, having 
in their company 300 men, whom L'OUonais led, and leaving 
behind him Moses van Vin for his Heutenant to govern the rest 
in his absence. Being come 3 leagues upon their way, they 
met with a troop of Spaniards, who lay in ambuscade for their 
coming. These they set upon with all the courage imaginable, 
and at last totally defeated, howbeit they behaved themselves 
very manfully at the beginning of the fight. But, not being 
able to resist the fury of the Pirates, they were forced to give 
way and save themselves by flight, leaving many Pirates dead 
upon the place and wounded, as also some of their own party 
maimed by the way. These L'OUonais put to death without 
mercy, having asked them what questions he thought fit for 
his purpose. 

There were still remaining some few prisoners who were not 
wounded. These were asked by L'OUonais if any more 
Spaniards did he farther on in ambuscade : unto whom they 
answered, there were. Then he commanded them to be 
brought before him, one by one, and asked if there was no 
other way to be found to the town but that. This he did out 
of a design to excuse, if possible, those ambuscades. But they 
all constantly answered him, they knew none. Having asked 
them all, and finding they could show him no other way, 
L'OUonais grew outrageously passionate ; insomuch that he 
drew his cutlass, and with it cut open the breast of one of those 
poor Spaniards, and, pulling out his heart with his sacrilegious 
hands, began to bite and gnaw it with his teeth like a ravenous 
wolf, saying to the rest : / will serve you all alike if you show 
me not another way. 



I04 L'OLLONAIS' INHUMANITIES 

Hereupon those miserable wretches promised to show him 
another way ; but withal they told him it was extremely 
difficult and laborious. Thus, to satisfy that cruel tyrant, 
they began to lead him and his army. But finding it not for 
his purpose, even as they told him, he was constrained unto 
return to the former way, swearing with great choler and 
indignation : Mort Dieu, les Espagnols me le payeront ! 
{By God's death, the Spaniards shall pay me for this ! ) . 

The next day he fell into another ambuscade, the which 
he assaulted with such horrible fury that in less than an hour's 
time he routed the Spaniards, and killed the greatest part of 
them. The Spaniards were persuaded that by these ambus- 
cades they should better be able to destroy the Pirates, assault- 
ing them by degrees ; and for this reason had posted them- 
selves in several places. At last he met with a third ambus- 
cade, where was placed a party of Spaniards both stronger and 
to greater advantage than the former. Yet, notwithstanding, 
the Pirates, by throwing with their hands little fireballs in 
great number, and continuing to do so for some time, forced 
this party, as well as the preceding, to flee ; and this with 
such great loss of men as that, before they could reach the town, 
the greatest part of the Spaniards were either killed or wounded. 
There was but one path which led to the town. This path was 
very well barricaded with good defences ; and the rest of the 
town round about was planted with certain shrubs or trees 
named raqueltes, very full of thorns and these very sharp- 
pointed. This sort of fortification seemed stronger than the 
triangles which are used in Europe, when an army is of 
necessity to pass by the place of an enemy, it being almost 
impossible for the Pirates to traverse those shrubs. The 
Spaniards that were posted behind the said defences, seeing 
the Pirates come, began to shoot at them with their great guns. 
But these, perceiving them ready to fire, used to stoop down, 
and, when the shot was made, fall upon the defendants with 
fireballs in hands and naked swords, killing with these weapons 
many of the town. Yet, notwithstanding, not being able to 
advance any farther, they were constrained to retire for 
the first time. Afterwards they returned to the attack again, 
with fewer men than before ; and, observing not to shoot till 
they were very near, they gave the Spaniards a charge so 
dexterously that with every shot they killed an enemjy. 



^^f^: 




" L'OUonais . . . drew his cutlass, and with it cut open the brear.t 
of one of those poor Spaniards, and, pulling out his heart with his 
sj^crilegious hands, began to bite and gnaw it with his teeth " (p. 103), 



THE PIRATES SEEK PROVISIONS 107 

The attack continuing thus eager on both sides till night, 
the Spaniards were compelled to hang forth a white flag, in 
token of truce and that they desired to come to a parley. The 
only conditions they required for delivering the town were : 
That the Pirates should give the inhabitants quarter for two hours. 
This short space of time they demanded, with intent to carry 
away and abscond as much of their goods and riches as they 
could, as also to flee to some other neighbouring town. Upon 
the agreement of this article they entered the town, and 
continued there the two hours above-mentioned, without 
committing the least act of hostility or causing any trouble 
to the inhabitants. But no sooner that time was passed than 
L'OUonais ordered the inhabitants should be followed and 
robbed of all they had carried away ; and not only goods, but 
their persons, likewise, to be made all prisoners. Notwith- 
standing, the greatest part of their merchandize and goods 
were in such manner absconded as the Pirates could not find 
them ; they meeting only a few leathern sacks that were filled 
with anil, or indigo^. 

Having stayed at this town some few days, and according to 
their usual customs committed there most horrid insolences, 
they at last quitted the place, carrying away with them all 
that they possibly could, and reducing the town totally into 
ashes. Being come to the seaside, where they left a party of 
their own comrades, they found these had busied themselves 
in cruizing upon the fishermen that lived thereabouts or came 
that way from the river of Guatemala. In this river also was 
expected a ship that was to come from Spain. Finally they 
resolved to go towards the islands that lie on the other side of 
the gulf, there to cleanse and careen their vessels. But in the 
meanwhile they left two canoes before the coast, or rather the 
mouth of the river of Guatemala, to the intent they should 
take the ship which, as I said before, was expected from Spain. 

But their chief intention of going to those islands was to 
seek provisions, as knowing the tortoises of those places are 
very excellent and pleasant food. As soon as they arrived 
there, they divided into troops, each party choosing a fit post 
for that fishery. Every one of them undertook to knit a net 

^ The West Indian indigo plant, Indigo/era anil. Cf. Linschoten, 
Voyages, Bk. i, vol. i, p. 6i (ed. 1885) : ' annell or indigo groweth onely 
in Cambaia.' 



io8 ISLANDS OF PITCH. AMBER 

with the rinds of certain trees called in those parts macoa. Of 
these rinds they make also ropes and cables for the service of 
ships ; insomuch that no vessel can be in need of such things 
whensoever they can but find the said trees. There are also in 
those parts many places where they find pitch^, which is 
gathered thereabouts in great abundance. The quantity hereof 
is so great that, running down the sea-coasts being melted by 
the heat of the sun, it congeals in the water into great heaps, 
and represents the shape of small islands. This pitch is not 
like unto that we have in the countries of Europe, but is hugely 
like, both in colour and shape, that froth of the sea which is 
called by the naturalists bitumen. But in my judgment 
this matter is nothing else but wax, which stormy weather has 
cast into the sea, being part of that huge quantity which in the 
neighbouring territories is made by the bees. Thus from 
places far distant from the sea it is also brought to the sea- 
coast by the winds and rolling waves of great rivers ; being 
likewise mingled with sand, and having the smell of black 
amber, such as is sent us from the Orient. In those parts are 
found great quantities of the said bees, who make their honey 
in trees ; whence it happens that the honey-combs being 
fixed unto the bodies of the trees, when tempests arise they 
are torn away, and by the fury of the winds carried into the 
sea, as has been said before. Some naturalists are willing to 
say that between the honey and the wax is made a separation 
by means of the salt water, whence proceeds also the good 
amber. This opinion is rendered the more probable because 
the said amber, being found and tasted, it affords the like taste 
as wax does. 

But now, returning to my discourse, I shall let you know 
that the Pirates made in those islands all the haste to equip 
their vessels they could possibly, by reason they had news the 
Spanish ship which they expected was come. They spent 
some time in cruizing upon the coasts of Yucatan, whereabouts 
inhabit many Indians, who seek for the amber above-mentioned 
in those seas. But seeing we are come to this place, I shall 
here, by the by, make some short remarks on the manner of 
living of these Indians, and the divine worship which they 
practice. 

* The pitch lake of La Brea, Trinidad, is celebrated. Asphalt is an 
important article of export from Trinidad at the present day. 



THE INDIANS OF YUCATAN 109 

The Indians of tlie coasts of Yucatan have now been above 
one hundred years under the dominion of the Spaniards. 
Unto this nation they performed all manner of service ; for, 
whensoever any of them had need of a slave or servant, they 
sent to seek one of these Indians to serve them as long as they 
pleased. By the Spaniards they were initiated at first in the 
principles of Christian faith and religion. Being thus made a 
part of Christianity, they used to send them every Sunday and 
holiday through the whole year a priest to perform divine 
service among them. Afterwards, for what reasons are not 
known, but certainly through evil temptations of the Father 
of Idolatry, the Devil, they suddenly cast off Christian religion 
again, and abandoned the true divine worship, beating withal 
and abusing the priest that was sent them. This provoked the 
Spaniards to punish them according to their deserts, which 
they did by casting many of the chiefest of these Indians into 
prison. Every one of those barbarians had, and has still, 
a god to himself whom he serves and worships. It is 
a thing that deserves all admiration, to consider how 
they use in this particular a child that is newly born into 
the world. As soon as this is issued from the womb of the 
mother, they carry it to the temple. Here they make a circle 
or hole, which they fill with ashes, without mingling anything 
else with them. Upon this heap of ashes they place the child 
naked, leaving it there a whole night alone, not without great 
danger ; nobody daring to come near it. In the meanwhile 
the temple is open on all sides, to the intent all sorts of beasts 
may freely come in and out. The next day the father and 
relations of the infant return thither, to see if the track or step 
of any animal appears to be printed in the ashes. Not finding 
any, they leave the child there until some beast has approached 
the infant and left behind him the mark of his feet. Unto this 
animal, whatsoever it be, they consecrate the creature newly 
born as unto its god, which he is bound to worship and serve 
all his life, esteeming the said beast as his patron and protector 
in all cases of danger or necessity. They offer unto their gods 
sacrifices of fire, wherein they burn a certain gum called by them 
copal^, whose smoke affords a very delicious smell. When the 
infant is grown up, the parents thereof tell him and show him 

* Spanish copal : a resin. Cf. Frampton, Joyfull Ncwes [1577] : ' The 
copal is a rosine very white.' 



no MARRIAGE CUSTOMS OF INDIANS 

whom he ought to worship, serve, and honour as his own 
proper god. This being known, he goes to the temple, where 
he makes offerings unto the said beast. Afterwards, if in 
the course of his Ufe any one has injured him or any evil 
happens to him, he complains thereof to that beast, and 
sacrifices unto it for revenge. Whence many times comes that 
those who have done the injury of which he complains are 
found to be bitten, killed, or otherwise hurt by such animals. 
After this superstitious and idolatrous manner do live those 
miserable and ignorant Indians that inhabit all the islands of 
the Gulf of Honduras, as also many of them that dwell upon 
the continent of Yucatan. In the territories of which country 
are found most excellent ports for the safety of ships, where 
those Indians most commonly love to build their houses. 
These people are not very faithful one to another, and likewise 
use strange ceremonies at their marriages. Whensoever any 
one pretends to marry a young damsel, he first applies himself 
to her father or nearest relation. He then examines him very 
exactly concerning the manner of cultivating their plantations 
and other things at his pleasure. Having satisfied the ques- 
tions that were put to him by the father-in-law, he gives the 
young man a bow and arrow. With these things he repairs 
to the young maid, and presents her with a garland of green 
leaves, interweaved with sweet-smelling flowers. This she is 
obliged to put upon her head, and lay aside that which she 
wore before that time ; it being the custom of the country that 
all virgins go perpetually crowned with flowers. This garland 
being received and put upon the head, every one of the relations 
and friends go to advise with others among themselves, whether 
that marriage will be useful and of likely happiness or not. 
Afterwards the aforesaid relations and friends meet together 
at the house of the damsel's father, and they drink of a certain 
liquor made of maize, or Indian wheat. And here before the 
whole company the father gives his daughter in marriage unto 
the bridegroom. The next day the newly-married bride comes 
to her mother, and in her presence pulls off the garland and 
tears it in pieces, with great cries and bitter lamentations, 
according to the custom of the country. Many other things 
I could relate at large of the manner of living and customs of 
those Indians ; but these I shall omit, thereby to follow my 
discourse. 



CAPTURE OF THE SPANISH SHIP 1 1 1 

Our Pirates, therefore, had many canoes of the Indians in 
the isle of Sambale, five leagues distant from the coasts of 
Yucatan. In the aforesaid island is found great quantity of 
amber, but more especially when any storm arises from to- 
wards the East, whence the waves bring many things and very 
different. Through this sea no vessels can pass, unless very 
small, the waters being too shallow. In the lands that are 
surrounded by this sea is found huge quantity of Campeche 
wood^ and other things of this kind, that serve for the art of 
dyeing, which occasions them to be much esteemed in Europe, 
and doubtless would be much more, in case we had the skill 
and science of the Indians, who are so industrious as to make 
a dye or tincture that never changes its colour nor fades away. 

After that the Pirates had been in that gulf three entire 
months, they received advice that the Spanish ship was come. 
Hereupon they hastened unto the port, where the ship lay at 
anchor unlading the merchandize it brought, with design to 
assault her as soon as it was possible. But, before this attempt, 
they thought it convenient to send away some of their boats 
from the mouth of the river, to seek for a small vessel which 
was expected, having notice that she was very richly laden, 
the greatest part of the cargo being plate, indigo, and cochineal. 
In the meanwhile the people of the ship that was in the port had 
notice given that the Pirates designed upon them. Hereupon 
they prepared all things very well for the defence of the said 
vessel, which was mounted with 42 guns, had many arms on 
board and other necessaries, together with 130 fighting men. 
Unto L'Ollonias all this seemed but little ; and thus he assaulted 
her with great courage, his own ship carrying only 22 guns, and 
having no more than a small saeiia, or flyboat, for help. 
But the Spaniards defended themselves after such manner as 
they forced the Pirates to retire. Notwithstanding, while the 
smoke of the powder continued very thick, as amidst a dark 
fog or mist, they sent four canoes very well manned, and 
boarded the ship with great agility, whereby they compelled 
the Spaniards to surrender. 

The ship being taken, they found not in her what they 
thought, as being already almost wholly unladed. All the 

* Logwood, named from Campeachy on the West coast of Yucatan. 
Cf. " The chiefest merchandize which they lade there in small frigats 
is a certeine wood called campeche (wherewith they vse to die)." — 
Hakluyt, Voyages [1606], vol. iii, p. 461. 



112 SPLITTING UP OF THE PIRATES 

treasure they here got consisted only in fifty bars of iron, a 
small parcel of paper, some earthen jars full of wine, and other 
things of this kind : all of small importance. 
/'Presently after, L'Ollonais called a council of the whole fleet, 
wherein he told them he intended to go to Guatemala. Upon 
this point they divided into several sentiments ; some of them 
liking the proposal very well, and others disliking it as much — 
especially a certain party of them, who were but new in those 
exercises of piracy, and who had imagined at their setting 
forth from Tortuga that pieces-of-eight were gathered as 
easily as pears from a tree. But, having found at last most 
things contrary to their expectation, they quitted the fleet, 
and returned whence they set out. Others, on the contrary, 
affirmed they had rather die of hunger than return home with- 
out a great deal of money. / 

But the major part of the company, judging the propounded 
voyage little fit for their purpose, separated from L'Ollonais 
and the rest. Among these was ringleader one Moses Vanclein, 
who was captain of the ship taken at Puerto Cavallo. This 
fellow took his course towards Tortuga, designing to cruize to 
and fro in those seas. With him also joined another comrade 
of his own, by name Pierre le Picard, who, seeing the rest to 
leave L'Ollonais, thought fit to do the same. These runaways 
having thus parted company, steered their course homewards, 
coasting along the continent till they came at last unto Costa 
Rica. Here they landed a strong party of men nigh unto the 
river of Veraguas, and marched in good order unto the town of 
the same name. This place they took and totally pillaged, 
notwithstanding that the Spaniards made a strong and warlike 
resistance. They brought away some of the inhabitants as 
prisoners, with] all that they had robbed, which was of no great 
importance, the reason hereof being the poverty of the place, 
which exercises no manner of trade than only working in the 
mines, where some of the inhabitants do constantly attend. 
Yet no other persons seek for the gold than only slaves. 
These they compel to dig, whether they live or die, and wash 
the earth that is taken out in the neighbouring rivers ; where 
oftentimes they find pieces of gold as big as peas. Finally, 
the pirates found in this robbery no greater value than 7 or 
8 pounds weight of gold. Hereupon they returned back, 
giving over the design they had to go farther on to the town of 



INDIANS OF DE LAS PERTAS 113 

Nata, situated upon the coasts of the South Sea. Hitherto 
they designed to march, knowing the inhabitants to be rich 
merchants, who had their slaves at work in the mines of 
Veraguas. But from this enterprize they were deterred by 
the multitude of Spaniards whom they saw gather on all sides 
to fall upon them ; whereof they had timely advice before- 
hand. 

L'OlIonais, thus abandoned by his companions, remained 
alone in the Gulf of Honduras, by reason his ship was too great 
to get out at the time of the reflux of those seas, which the 
smaller vessels could do more easily. There he sustained 
great want of all sorts of provisions, insomuch as they were 
constrained to go ashore every day to seek wherewithal to 
maintain themselves. And, not finding anything else, they 
were forced to kill monkeys and other animals such as they 
could find, for their sustenance. 

At last having found, in the latitude of the Cape of Gracias 
^ Dios, certain little islands called De las Pertas, here, nigh 
unto these isles, his ship fell upon a bank of sand, where it 
stuck so fast as no art could be found to get her off into deep 
water again, notwithstanding they unladed all the guns, iron, 
and other weighty things as much as possibly they could : but 
all they could do was to little or no effect. Hereupon they 
were necessitated to break the ship in pieces, and with some of 
the planks and nails build themselves a boat, wherewith to 
get away from those islands. Thus they began their work ; 
and, while they are employed about it, I shall pass to describe 
succinctly the isles aforementioned and their inhabitants. 

The islands called De las Pertas are inhabited by Indians, 
who are properly savages, as not having at any time known or 
conversed with any civil people. They are tall in stature 
and very nimble in running, which they perform almost as 
fast as horses. At diving also in the sea they are very dexter- 
ous and hardy. From the bottom of the sea I saw them take 
up an anchor that weighed 600 pound, by tying a cable unto 
it with great dexterity and pulling it from a rock. They use 
no other arms than such as are made of wood, without any 
iron, unless that some instead therefore do fix a crocodile-tooth, 
which serves for a point. They have neither bows nor arrows 
among them, as other Indians have ; but their common 
weapon is a sort of lances, that are long a fathom and a half. 



114 INDIANS OF DE LAS PERTAS 

In these islands there are many plantations surrounded with 
woods, whence they gather great abundance of fruits. Such 
are potatoes, bananas, racoven, ananas, and many others, 
which the constitution of the soil affords. Nigh unto these 
plantations they have no houses to dwell in, as in other places 
of the Indies. Some are of opinion that these Indians eat 
human flesh, which seems to be confirmed by what happened 
when L'Ollonais was there. Two of his companions, the one 
being a Frenchman and the other a Spaniard, went into the 
woods, where, having straggled up and down some while, 
they met with a troop of Indians that began to pursue them. 
They defended themselves as well as they could with their 
swords, but at last were forced to flee. This the Frenchman 
performed with great agility : but the Spaniard, being not so 
swift as his companion, was taken by those barbarians, and 
heard of no more. Some days after, they attempted to go into 
the woods to see what was become of their companion. Unto 
this effect twelve Pirates set forth very well armed, amongst 
whom was the Frenchman, who conducted them, and shewed 
them the place where he left his companion. Here they found, 
nigh unto the place, that the Indians had kindled fire ; and, 
at a small distance thence, they found the bones of the said 
Spaniard very well roasted. Hence they inferred that they had 
roasted the miserable Spaniard, of whom they found more, 
some pieces of flesh ill scraped off from the bones and one hand, 
which had only two fingers remaining. 

They marched farther on, seeking for Indians. Of these 
they found a great number together, who endeavoured to 
escape, seeing the Pirates so strong and well armed. But they 
overtook some of them, and brought on board their ships 
five men and four women. With these they used all the means 
they could invent to make themselves to be understood and 
gain their affections, giving them certain small trifles, as 
knives, beads, and the like things. They gave them also 
victuals and drink, but nothing of either would they taste. 
It was also observable that all the while they were prisoners 
on board the ships, they spoke not one word to each other 
among themselves. Thus the Pirates, seeing these poor 
Indians were much afraid of them, presented them again with 
some small things, and let them go. When they departed, 
they made signs, giving them to understand they would come 



DISAPPEARANCE OF THE INDIANS 115 

again. But they soon forgot their benefactors, and were never 
heard nor seen more. Neither could any notice afterwards be 
had of these Indians or any others in the whole island after 
that time ; which occasioned the Pirates to suspect that both 
those that were taken, and all the rest of the island, did ail 
swim away by night to some other little neighbouring islands, 
especially considering they could never set eyes on any Indian 
more ; neither was there ever seen any boat or other vessel in 
the whole circumference of the island. 

In the meanwhile the Pirates were very desirous to see their 
long-boat finished, which they were building with the timber 
of the ship that stuck upon the sands. Yet, considering 
their work would be long, they began to cultivate some pieces 
of ground. Here they sowed French beans, which came to 
maturity in six weeks time, and many other fruits. They had 
good provision of Spanish wheat, bananas, racoven, and other 
things. With the wheat they made bread, and baked it in 
portable ovens which they had brought with them to this 
effect. Thus they feared not hunger in those desert places. 
After this manner they employed themselves for the space of 
five or six months. Which time being passed, and the long-boat 
finished, they determined to go unto the river of Nicaragua, to 
see if they could take some few canoes, and herewith return 
unto the said islands and fetch away their companions that 
remained behind, by reason the boat they had built was not 
capable of transporting so many men together. Hereupon, to 
avoid any disputes that might arise, they cast lots among 
themselves, determining thereby who should go, or stay, in 
the island. 

The lot fell only upon one half of the people of the lost vessel, 
who embarked upon the long-boat they had built, and also 
the skiff which they had before, the other half remaining on 
shore. L'Ollonais, having set sail, arrived in a few days at the 
mouth of the river of Nicaragua. Here suddenly his ill- 
fortune assailed him, which of long time had been reserved for 
him as a punishment due unto the multitude of horrible 
crimes which in his licentious and wicked life he had committed. 
Here he met with both Spaniards and Indians, who jointly 
together set upon him and his companions, and used them so 
roughly that the greatest part of the Pirates were killed upon 
the place. L'Ollonais, with those that remained ahve, had much 



ii6 L'OLLONAIS BUTCHERED 

ado to escape on board their boats aforementioned. Yet, not- 
withstanding this great loss of men, he resolved not to return 
to seek those he had left at the Isle of Pertas without taking 
some boats, such as he looked for. Unto this effect he deter- 
mined to go farther on to the coasts of Cartagena, with design 
to seek for canoes. But God Almighty, the time of His 
Divine justice being now already come, had appointed the 
Indians of Darien to be the instruments and executioners 
thereof. The Indians of Darien are esteemed as bravos, or wild 
savage Indians, by the neighbouring Spaniards, who never 
could reduce them to civility. Hither L'Ollonais came (being 
rather brought by his evil conscience that cried for punishment 
of his crimes), thinking to act in that country his former 
cruelties. But the Indians within a few days after his arrival 
took him prisoner and tore him in pieces ahve, throwing 
his body Umb by limb into the fire, and his ashes into 
the air, to the intent no trace or memory might remain of 
such an infamous, inhuman creature. One of his companions 
gave me an exact account of the aforesaid tragedy, affirming 
withal that he himself had escaped the same punishment, not 
without the greatest of difficulties . He believed also that many 
of his comrades who were taken prisoners in that encounter 
by the Indians of Darien were after the same manner as their 
cruel captain torn in pieces and burned ahve. Thus ends 
the history of the life and miserable death of that infernal 
wretch L'Ollonias, who, full of horrid, execrable, and enormous 
deeds, and also debtor to so much innocent blood, died by cruel 
and butcherly hands, such as his own were in the course of his 
hfe. 

Those that remained in the island De las Pertas, waiting for 
the return of them who got away only to their great misfortune, 
hearing no news of their captain nor companions, at last 
embarked themselves upon the ship of a certain Pirate who 
happened to pass that way. This fellow was come from 
Jamaica with intent to land at the Cape of Gracias a Dios, 
and hence to mount the river with his canoes and take the city 
of Cartagena. These two parcels of Pirates being now joined 
together were infinitely gladded at the presence and society 
of one another. Those because they found themselves de- 
livered from their miseries, poverty, and necessities, wherein 
now they had lived the space of ten entire months — these, 



REDUCED TO EXTREMITIES 117 

because they were now considerably strengthened, whereby 
to effect with greater satisfaction their intended designs. 
Hereupon, as soon as they were arrived unto the aforesaid 
Cape of Gracias i Dios, they all put themselves into canoes, 
and with these vessels mounted the river, being in number 500 
men ; leaving only 5 or 6 persons in every ship to keep them. 
They took no provisions with them, as being persuaded they 
should find everywhere sufficient. ]3ut these their own hopes 
were found totally vain, as not being grounded in God Almighty. 
For He ordained it so that the Indians, having perceived their 
coming, were all fled before them, not leaving in their houses nor 
plantations, which for the most part do border upon the sides 
of rivers, anything of necessary provisions or victuals. Here- 
by in few days after they had quitted their ships, they were 
reduced to such necessity and hunger as nothing could be more 
extreme. Notwithstanding, the hopes they had conceived 
of making their fortunes very soon did animate them for the 
present, being contented in this affliction with a few green 
herbs, such as they could gather as they went upon the banks 
of the river. 

Yet all this courage and vigour of mind could not last above 
a fortnight. After which, their hearts, as well as their bodies, 
began to fail for hunger ; insomuch as they found themselves 
constrained to quit the river and betake themselves unto the 
woods, seeking out some small villages where they might find 
relief for their necessity. But all was in vain ; for, having ranged 
up and down the woods for some days without finding the 
least comfort to their hungry desires, they were forced to return 
again unto the river. Where being come, they thought it 
convenient to descend unto the sea-coasts where they had left 
their ships, not being able to find in the present enterprize 
what they sought for. In this laborious journey they were 
reduced to such extremity that many of them devoured their 
own shoes, the sheaths of their swords, knives, and other things 
of this kind, being almost ravenous, and fully desirous to meet 
some Indians, intending to sacrifice them unto their teeth. 
At last they arrived at the coast of the sea, where they found 
some comfort and relief to their former miseries, and also 
means to seek more. Yet, notwithstanding, the greatest part 
of them perished through faintness and other diseases con- 
tracted by hunger ; whicjh gccasioned also the remaining part 



ii8 END OF THE EXPEDITION 

to disperse — till at last by degrees many or most of them fell 
into the same pit that L'OUonais did. Of him and of his 
companions I have hitherto given my reader a compendious 
narrative, which now I shall continue with the actions and 
exploits of Captain Henry Morgan, who may not undeservedly 
be called the second L'OUonais, as not being unlike or inferior 
unto him either in achievements against the Spaniards or in 
robberies of many innocent people. 






CHAPTKR IV 

Of the origin and descent of Captain Henry Morgan — his 
exploits and a continuation of the most remarkable actions 
of his life 

Captain Henry Morgan was born in the kingdom of 
England, and there in the principahty of Wales. His father 
was a rich yeoman, or farmer, and of good quality in that 
country, even as most who bear that name in Wales are 
known to be. ^lorgan, being as yet young, had no incHnations 
to follow the calling of his father ; and therefore left his 
country and came towards the sea-coasts to seek some other 
employ more suitable to his humour, that aspired to some- 
thing else. There he found entertainment in a certain port 
where several ships lay at anchor, that were bound for the isle 
of Barbados. With these ships he resolved to go in the 
service of one who, according to what is commonly practised 
in those parts by the English and other nations, sold him as 
soon as he came on shore. He served his time at Barbados, 
and when he had obtained his liberty, thence transferred 
himself unto the island of Jamaica, there to seek new fortunes. 
Here he found two vessels of Pirates that were ready to go to 
sea. Being destitute of employ, he put himself into one of these 
ships, with intent to follow the exercises of that sort of people. 
He learned in a little while their manner of living ; and so 
exactly that, having performed three or four voyages with 
some profit and good success, he agreed with some of his 
comrades, who had gotten by the same voyages a small parcel 
of money, to join stocks and buy a ship. The vessel being 
bought, they unanimously chose him to be the Captain and 
Commander thereof. / 

With this ship, soon after, he set forth from Jamaica to cruize 
upon the coasts of Campeche, in which voyage he had the 

119 



I20 CAPTAIN HENRY MORGAN 

fortune to take several ships, with which he returned trium- 
phant to the same island. Here he found at the same time an 
old Pirate named Mansvelt (of whom we have already made 
mention in the First Part of this book), who was then busied in 
equipping a considerable fleet of ships, with design to land 
upon the Continent and pillage whatever came in his way. 
Mansvelt, seeing Captain Morgan return with so many prizes, 
judged him from his actions to be of undaunted courage, and 
hereupon was moved to choose him for his Vice-Admiral in 
that expedition. Thus, having fitted out fifteen ships between 
great and small, they set sail from Jamaica with 500 men, both 
Walloons and French. With this fleet they arrived not long 
after at the isle of St Catharine, situated nigh unto the 
continent of Costa Rica, in the latitude of twelve-degrees- 
and-a-half North, and distant thirty-five leagues from the river 
of Chagre, between North and South. Here they made their 
first descent, landing most of their men presently after. 

Being now come to try their arms and fortune, they in a 
short while forced the garrison that kept the island to surrender 
and deliver into their hands all the forts and castles belonging 
thereunto. All these they instantly demolished, reserving 
only one, wherein they placed one hundred men of their own 
party and all the slaves they had taken from the Spaniards. 
With the rest of their men they marched unto another small 
island nigh unto that of St Catharine, and adjoining so near 
unto it that with a bridge they could get over. In few days 
they made a bridge, and passed thither, conveying also over 
it all the pieces of ordnance which they had taken upon the 
great island. Having ruined and destroyed, with sword and 
fire, both the islands, leaving what orders were necessary 
at the castle above-mentioned, they put forth to sea again 
with the Spaniards they had taken prisoners. Yet these 
they set on shore, not long after, upon the firm land nigh 
unto a place called Porto Bello. After this they began* 
to cruize upon the coasts of Costa Rica, till that finally they 
came unto the river of Colla, designing to rob and pillage 
all the towns they could find in those parts, and afterwards 
to pass unto the village of Nata, to do the same. 

The President, or Governor, of Panama, having had advice of 
the arrival of these Pirates and the hostihties they committed 
everywhere, thought it his duty to set forth tQ their encounter 



LE SIEUR SIMON 121 

with a body of men. His coming caused the Pirates to retire 
suddenly with all speed and care, especially seeing the whole 
country alarmed at their arrival, and that their designs were 
known and consequently could be of no great effect at that 
present. Hereupon they returned unto the isle of St 
Catharine, to visit the hundred men they had left in garrison 
there. The Governor of these men was a certain Frenchman 
named Le Sieur Simon, who behaved himself very well in 
that charge, while Mansvelt was absent ; insomuch that he 
had put the great island in a very good posture of defence, 
and the little one he had caused to be cultivated with many 
fertile plantations, which were sufficient to revictual the whole 
fleet with provisions and fruits, not only for present refresh- 
ment but also in case of a new voyage. Mansvelt 's inclinations 
were very much bent to keep these two islands in perpetual 
possession, as being very commodious and profitably situated 
for the use of the Pirates, chiefly because they were so near 
unto the Spanish dominions and easily to be defended against 
them ; as I shall represent in the Third Part of this history 
more at large, in a copper plate delineated for this purpose. 

Hereupon Mansvelt determined to return unto Jamaica, 
with design to send some recruit to the isle of St Catharine, 
that, in case of any invasion of the Spaniards, the Pirates 
might be provided for a defence. As soon as he arrived, he 
propounded his mind and intentions unto the Governor of that 
island ; but he liked not the propositions of Mansvelt, fearing 
lest by granting such things he should displease his master, 
the King of England, besides that, giving him the men he 
desired, and other necessaries for that purpose, he must of 
necessity diminish and weaken the forces of that island whereof 
he was Governor. Mansvelt seeing the unwillingness of the 
Governor of Jamaica, and that of his own accord he could not 
compass what he desired, with the same intent and designs 
went to the isle of Tortuga. But there, before he could accom- 
plish his desires or put in execution what was intended, death 
suddenly surprised him and put a period to his wicked life ; 
all things hereby remaining in suspense, until the occasion^ 
which I shall hereafter relate. 

Le Sieur Simon, who remained at the isle of St Catharine in 
quality of Governor thereof, receiving no news from Mansvelt, 
his admirai, was grea^tlv impatient and desicQUS to know what. 



122 RETAKING OF ST CATHARINE 

might be the cause thereof. In the meanwhile Don John 
Perez de Guzman, being newly come to the government of 
Costa Rica, thought it no ways convenient for the interest of 
the King of Spain that that island should remain in the hands 
of the Pirates. And hereupon he equipped a considerable 
fleet, which he sent unto the said island to retake it. But, 
before he came to use any great violence, he wrote a letter to 
Le Sieur Simon, wherein he gave him to understand, if he 
would surrender the island unto his Catholic Majesty, he should 
be very well rewarded ; but, in case of refusal, severely 
punished when he had forced him to do it. Le Sieur Simon, 
seeing no appearance or probability of being able to defend it 
alone, nor any emolument that by so doing could accrue either 
unto him or his people, after some small resistance delivered up 
the island into the hands of its true lord and master, under 
the same articles they had obtained it from the Spaniards. 
Few days after the surrender of the island there arrived from 
Jamaica an English ship which the Governor of the said 
island had sent underhand, Vherein was a good supply of 
people, both men and women. The Spaniards from the 
castle, having espied this ship, put forth the English colours, 
and persuaded Le Sieur Simon to go on board and conduct the 
said ship into a port they assigned him. This he performed 
immediately with dissimulation, whereby they were all made 
prisoners. A certain Spanish engineer has published, before me, 
an exact account and relation of the retaking of the isle of 
St Catharine by the Spaniards ; which printed paper being 
fallen into my hands, I have thought it fit to be inserted here. 

A true Relation and particular Account of the Victory obtained 
by the Arms of his Catholic Majesty against the English 
Pirates, by the direction and valour of Don John Perez 
de Guzman, Knight of the Order of St James, Governor 
and Captain-General of Terra Firma and the Province 
of Veraguas 

The kingdom of Terra Firma, which of itself is sufficiently 
strong to repulse and extirpate great fleets but more especially 
the Pirates of Jamaica, had several ways notice under several 
hands imparted to the Governor thereof, that fourteen English 
vessels did cruize upon the coasts belonging to his Catholic 
Majesty. The 14th day of July 1665 news came unto Panama. 



DON JOHN PEREZ DE GUZMAN 123 

that the EngHsh Pirates of the said fleet were arrived at Puerto 
de Naos, and had forced the Spanish garrison of the isle of 
St Catharine, whose Governor was Don Kstevan del Campo, 
and that they had possessed themselves of the said island, 
taking prisoners the inhabitants and destroying all that ever 
they met. Moreover, about the same time Don John Perez 
de Guzman received particular information of these robberies 
from the relation of some Spaniards who escaped out of the 
island (and whom he ordered to be conveyed unto Porto 
Bello), who more distinctly told him that the aforementioned 
Pirates came into the Island the 2nd day of May by night, 
without being perceived by anybody ; and that the next day, 
after some disputes by arms, they had taken the fortresses 
and made prisoners all the inhabitants and soldiers, not one 
excepted unless those that by good fortune had escaped their 
hands. This being heard by Don John, he called a council 
of war, wherein he declared the great progress the said Pirates 
had made in the dominions of his CathoHc Majesty. Here 
likewise he propounded : That it was absolutely necessary 
to send some forces unto the isle of St Catharine, sujfficient to 
retake it from the Pirates, the honour and interest of his Majesty 
of Spain being very narrowly concerned herein. Otherwise the 
Pirates by such conquests might easily in course of time possess 
themselves of all the countries thereabouts. Unto these reasons 
>some Were found who made answer : That the Pirates, as not 
\heing able to subsist in the said island, would of necessity consume 
and waste themselves, and be forced to quit it without any necessity 
of retaking it. That consequently it was not worth the while 
to engage in so many expenses and troubles as might be foreseen 
this would cost. Notwithstanding these reasons to the con- 
trary, Don John, as one who was an expert and vaUant soldier, 
gave order that a quantity of provisions should be conveyed 
to Porto Bello, for the use and service of the mihtia. And, 
neither to be idle nor negligent in his master's affairs, he 
transported himself thither, with no small danger of his Hfe. 
Here he arrived the 7th day of July, with most things necessary 
to the expedition in hand ; where he found in the port a good 
ship, called St Vincent, that belonged unto the Company of 
the Negroes. This ship being of itself a strong vessel and 
well mounted with guns, he manned and victualled very well, 
and sent unto the isle of St Catharine, constituting Captain 
Joseph Sanchez Ximenez, Mayor of the city of Porto Bello, 
Commander thereof. The people he carried with him 
were, 270 soldiers, and 37 prisoners of the same island, 
besides 34 Spaniards belonging to the garrison of Porto 



124 THE ISLE OF ST CATHARINE 

Bello, 29 mulattos of Panama, 12 Indians very dexterous 
at shooting with bows and arrows, 7 expert and able gunners, 
2 lieutenants, 2 pilots, one surgeon, and one religious man of 
the Order of St Francis for their chaplain. 

Don John soon after gave his orders to every one of the 
officers, instructing them how they ought to behave themselves, 
teUing them withal that the Governor of Cartagena would 
assist and supply them with more men, boats, and all things 
else they should find necessary for that enterprize ; to which 
effect he had already written unto the said Governor. On 
the 24th day of the said month Don John commanded the 
ship to weigh anchor and sail out of the port. Then, seeing 
a fair wind to blow, he called before him all the people designed 
for that expedition, and made them a speech, encouraging 
them to fight against the enemies of their country and religion, 
but more especially against those inhuman Pirates who had 
heretofore committed so many horrid and cruel actions against 
the subjects of his Catholic Majesty — withal promising to 
every one of them most liberal rewards, but especially unto 
such as should behave themselves as they ought in the service 
of their king and country. Thus Don John bid them farewell, 
and immediately the ship weighed anchor, and set sail under 
a favourable gale of wind. The 22nd of the said month they 
arrived at Cartagena, and presented a letter unto the Governor 
of the said city from the noble and valiant Don John, who 
received it with testimonies of great affection unto the person 
of Don John and his Majesty's service. And, seeing their 
resolute courage to be conformable to his desires and expec- 
tation, he promised them his assistance, which should be with 
one frigate, one galleon, one boat, and 126 men, the one half 
out of his own garrison, and the other half mulattos. Thus, 
all of them being well provided with necessaries, they set 
forth from the port of Cartagena the 2nd day of August, and 
the loth of the said month they arrived within sight of the 
isle of St Catharine, towards the Western point thereof. And, 
although the wind was contrary, yet they reached the port, 
and came to an anchor within it, having lost one of their boats, 
by foul weather, at the rock called Quita Signos. 

The Pirates, seeing our ships come to an anchor, gave 
them presently three guns with bullets, the which were 
soon answered in the same coin. Hereupon the Mayor 
Joseph Sanchez Ximenez sent on shore unto the Pirates 
one of his officers, to require them in the name of the 
Catholic King, his Master, to surrender the island, seeing they 
had taken it in the midst of peace between the two crowns 



THE ISLE OF ST CATHARINE 125 

of Spain and England, and tliat, in case they would be obsti- 
nate, he would certainly put them all to the sword. The 
Pirates made answer ; That island had once be/ore belonged unto 
the Government and dominions of the King of England : and 
that, instead of surrendering it, they preferred to lose their lives. 

On Friday, the 13th of the said month, three negroes, from 
the enemy, came swimming aboard our Admiral. These 
brought intelligence that all the Pirates that were upon the 
island were only threescore-and-twelve in number, and that 
they were under a great consternation, seeing such consider- 
able forces come against them. With this intelligence the 
Spaniards resolved to land and advance towards the fortresses, 
the which ceased not to fire as many great guns against them 
as they possibly could, which were corresponded in the same 
manner on our side till dark night. On Sunday, the 15th 
of the said month, which was the day of the Assumption of 
Our Lady, the weather being very calm and clear, the Spani- 
ards began to advance thus. The ship named St Vincent, 
which rode Admiral, discharged two whole broadsides upon 
the battery called the Conception. The ship called St Peter, 
that was Vice-Admiral, discharged likewise her guns against 
the other battery named St James. In the meanwhile our 
people were landed in small boats, directing their course 
towards the point of the battery last mentioned, and thence 
they marched towards the gate called Cortadura. '^The 
lieutenant Frances de Cazeres, being desirous to view the 
strength of the enemy, with only 15 men, was compelled to 
retreat in all haste by reason of the great guns which played so 
furiously upon the place where he stood, they shooting not only 
pieces of iron and small bullets, but also the organs of the 
church, discharging in every shot threescore pipes at a time/ 

Notwithstanding this heat of the enemy. Captain Don 
Joseph Ramirez de Leyva, with threescore men, made a strong 
attack, wherein they fought on both sides very desperately, 
till that at last he overcame and forced the Pirates to surrender 
the fort he had taken in hand. 

On the other side. Captain John Galeno, with fourscore- 
and-ten men, passed over the hills, to advance that way 
towards the castle of St Teresa. In the meanwhile the Mayor 
Don Joseph Sanchez Ximenez, as commander-in-chief, with 
the rest of his men set forth from the battery of St James, 
passing the fort with four boats, and landing in despite of the 
enemy. About this same time Captain John Galeno began 
to advance with the men he led unto the forementioncd 
fortress. So that our men made three attacks upon the enemy, 



126 SURRENDER OF THE PIRATES 

on three several sides, at one and the same time, with great 
courage and valour. Thus the Pirates, seeing many of their 
men already killed and that they could in no manner subsist 
any longer, retreated towards Cortadura, where they surren- 
dered themselves and likewise the whole island into our hands. 
Our people possessed themselves of all, and set up the Spanish 
colours, as soon as they had rendered thanks to God Almighty 
for the victory obtained on such a signaHzcd day. The number 
of dead were six men of the enemy's with many wounded, 
and threescorc-and-ten prisoners. On our side was found only 
one man killed, and four wounded. 

There was found upon the island 800 pound of powder, 
250 pound of small bullets, with many other military pro- 
visions. Among the prisoners were taken also two Spaniards 
who had borne arms under the Enghsh against his Catholic 
Majesty. These were commanded to be shot to death the 
next day by order of the Mayor. The loth day of September 
arrived at the isle an English vessel, which being seen at a 
great distance by the Mayor, he gave order unto Le Sieur 
Simon, who was a Frenchman, to go and visit the said ship, 
and tell them that were on board the island belonged still 
unto the English. He performed the commands, and found in 
the said ship only 14 men, one woman and her daughter, who 
were all instantly made prisoners. 

The Enghsh Pirates were all transported to Porto Bello, 
excepting only three, who by order of the Governor were 
carried to Panama, there to work in the castle of St Jerome. 
This fortification is an excellent piece of workmanship, and 
very strong, being raised in the middle of the port, of quad- 
rangular form, and of very hard stone. Its elevation or 
height is 88 geometrical feet, the walls being 14 and the 
curtains 75 feet diameter. It was built at the expense of 
several private persons, the Governor of the city furnishing 
the greatest part of the money ; so that it did not cost his 
Majesty any sum at all. 



CHAPTER V 

Some account of the island of Cuba. Capt. Morgan attempts to 
preserve the isle of St Catharine as a refuge and nest unto 
Pirates ; but fails of his designs. He arrives at and takes 
the village of El Puerto del Principe 

/Captain Morgan, seeing his predecessor and Admiral 
Mansvelt was dead, endeavoured as much as he could, and 
used all the means that were possible, to preserve and keep 
in perpetual possession the Isle of St Catharine, seated nigh 
unto that of Cuba. His principal intent was to consecrate it 
as a refuge and sanctuary unto the Pirates of those parts, 
putting it in a sufficient condition of being a convenient 
receptacle or storehouse of their preys and robberies. Unto 
this effect he left no stone unmoved whereby to compass his 
designs, writing for the same purpose unto several merchants 
that lived in Virginia and New England, and persuading them 
to send him provisions and other necessary things towards 
the putting the said island in such a posture of defence as it 
might neither fear any external dangers nor be moved at any 
suspicions of invasion from any side that might attempt 
to disquiet it. At last all his thoughts and cares proved 
ineffectual by the Spaniards retaking the said island. Yet, 
notwithstanding. Captain Morgan retained his ancient courage, 
which instantly put him upon new designs. Thus he equipped 
at first a ship, with intention to gather an entire fleet, both as 
great and as strong as he could compass. By degrees he put 
the whole matter in execution, and gave order unto every 
member of this fleet, they should meet at a certain port of 
Cuba. Here he determined to call a council, and deliberate 
concerning what were best to be done, and what place first 
hey should fall upon. Leaving these new preparations in 
this condition, I shall here give my reader some small account 

127 



128 THE ISLAND OF CUBA 

of the aforementioned isle of Cuba, in whose ports this expe- 
dition was hatched, seeing I omitted to do it in its proper 
place. 

The island of Cuba lies from East to West, in the latitude 
and situation of twenty unto 23 degrees North, being in length 
150 German leagues and about 40 in breadth. Its fertihty 
is equal unto that of the island of Hispaniola. Besides which, 
it affords many things proper for trading and commerce, such 
as are hides of several beasts, particularly those that in Europe 
are called Hides of Havana. On all sides it is surrounded with 
a great number of small islands, which go altogether under the 
name of Cayos. Of these little islands the Pirates make great 
use, as of their own proper ports of refuge. Here most com- 
monly they make their meetings and hold their councils, how 
to assault more easily the Spaniards. It is thoroughly irrigated 
on all sides with the streams of plentiful and pleasant rivers, 
whose entries do form both secure and spacious ports, besides 
many other harbours for ships, which along the calm shores 
and coasts do adorn many parts of this rich and beautiful 
island ; all which contribute very much unto its happiness, by 
facilitating the exercise of trade, whereunto they invite both 
natives and aliens. The chiefest of these ports are Santiago, 
Bayame, Santa Maria, Espiritu Santo, Trinidad, Xagoa, 
Cabo de Corrientes, and others, all which are seated on the 
south side of the island. On the northern side hereof are 
found the following : La Havana, Puerto Mariano, Santa 
Cruz, Mata Ricos, and Barracoa. 

This island has two principal cities, by which the whole 
country is governed, and unto which all the towns and villages 
thereof do give obedience. The first of these is named Santiago, 
or St James, being seated on the South side, and having under 
its jurisdiction one half of the island. The chief magistrates 
hereof are a Bishop and a Governor, who command over the 
villages and towns belonging to the half above-mentioned. 
The chiefest of these are, on the Southern side Espiritu 
Santo, Puerto del Principe, and Bayame ; on the North side 
it has Barracoa and the town called De los Cayos. The 
greatest part of the commerce driven at the aforementioned 
city of Santiago comes from the Canary Islands, whither 
they transport great quantity of tobacco, sugar, and hides : 
which sorts of merchandize are drawn to the head city from 



CAPT. MORGAN EQUIPS A FLEET 129 

the subordinate towns and villages. In former times this 
city of Santiago was miserably sacked by the Pirates of Jamaica 
and Tortuga, notwithstanding that it is defended by a con- 
siderable castle. 

The city and port De la Havana lies between the North and 
West side of the island. This is one of the renownedest and 
strongest places of all the West Indies. Its jurisdiction 
extends over the other half of the island, the chiefest places 
under it being Santa Cruz on the Northern side and La 
Trinidad on the South. Hence is transported huge quantities 
of tobacco, which is sent in great plenty unto New Spain and 
Costa Rica, even as far as the South Sea ; besides many ships 
laden with this commodity that are consigned to Spain and 
other parts of Europe, not only in the leaf but also in rolls. 
This city is defended by three castles, very great and strong, 
two of which lie towards the port, and the other is seated upon 
a hill that commands the town. Tis esteemed to contain 
10,000 families, more or less ; among which number of people 
the merchants of this place trade in New Spain, Campeche, 
Honduras, and Florida. All the ships that come from the parts 
aforementioned, as also from Caracas, Cartagena, and Costa 
Rica, are necessitated to take their provisions in at Havana, 
wherewith to make their voyage for Spain ; this being the 
necessary and straight course they ought to steer for the South 
of Europe and other parts. The plate-fleet of Spain, which 
the Spaniards call flota, being homeward bound, touches here 
yearly, to take in the rest of their full cargo, as hides, tobacco, 
and Campeche wood. 

Captain Morgan had been no longer than two months in 
the above-mentioned ports of the South of Cuba, when he 
had got together a fleet of twelve sail, between ships and great 
boats ; wherein he had 700 fighting men, part of which were 
English and part French. They called a council, and some 
were of opinion 'twere convenient to assault the city of Havana 
under the obscurity of the night ; which enterprize, they said, 
might easily be performed, especially if they could but take 
any few of the ecclesiastics and make them prisoners — yea, 
that the city might be sacked, before the castles could put 
themselves in a posture of defence. Others propounded, 
according to their several opinions, other attempts. Not- 
withstanding, the former proposal was rejected, because many 



I30 ATTACK ON PUERTO DEL PRINCIPE 

of the Pirates had been prisoners at other times in the said 
city ; and these affirmed nothing of consequence could be done 
unless with 1500 men. Moreover, that with all this number 
of people they ought first to go unto the island De los Pinos, 
and land them in small boats about Matamana, 14 leagues 
distant from the aforesaid city, whereby to accomphsh by these 
means and order their designs. 

Finally, they saw no possibility of gathering so great a fleet ; 
and hereupon with that they had they concluded to attempt 
some other place. Among the rest was found, at last, one who 
propounded they should go and assault the town of El Puerto 
del Principe. This proposition he endeavoured to persuade, 
by saying he knew that place very well, and that, being at a 
distance from the sea, it never was sacked by any Pirates, 
whereby the inhabitants were rich, as exercising their trade for 
ready money with those of Havana, who kept here an estab- 
lished commerce which consisted chiefly in hides. This 
proposal was presently admitted by Captain Morgan and the 
chiefest of his companions. And hereupon they gave order 
to every Captain to weigh anchor and set sail, steering their 
course towards that coast that lies nearest unto El Puerto del 
Principe. Hereabouts is to be seen a bay named by the 
Spaniards El Puerto de Santa Maria. Being arrived at this 
bay, a certain Spaniard, who was prisoner on board the 
fleet, swam ashore by night, and came unto the town of Puerto 
del Principe, giving account to the inhabitants of the design 
the Pirates had against them. This he affirmed to have over- 
heard in their discourse, while they thought he did not under- 
stand the English tongue. The Spaniards, as soon as they 
received this fortunate advice, began instantly to hide their 
riches, and carry away what movables they could. The 
Governor also immediately raised all the people of the town, 
both freeman and slaves ; and with part of them took a post 
by which of necessity the Pirates were to pass. He commanded 
likewise many trees to be cut down and laid amidst the ways 
to hinder their passage. In like manner he placed several 
ambuscades, which were strengthened with some pieces of 
cannon, to play upon them on their march. He gathered in 
all about 800 men, of which he distributed several into 
the aforementioned ambuscades, and with the rest he begirt 
the town, displaying them upon the plain of a spacious 



PUERTO DEL PRINCIPE SURRENDERS 131 

field, whence they could see the coming of the Pirates at 
length. 

Captain Morgan, with his men, being now upon the march, 
found the avenues and passages unto the town impenetrable. 
Hereupon they took the way through the wood, traversing it 
with great difficulty, whereby they escaped divers ambuscades. 
Thus at last they came into the plain aforementioned, which, 
from its figure, is called by the Spaniards La Savana, or The 
Sheet. The Governor, seeing them come, made a detach- 
ment of a troop of horse, which he sent to charge them in the 
front, thinking to disperse them, and, by putting them to 
flight, pursue them with his main body. But this design 
succeeded not as it was intended. For the Pirates marched 
in very good rank and file, at the sound of their drums and 
with flying colours. When they came nigh unto the horse, 
they drew into the form of a semicircle, and thus advanced 
towards the Spaniards, who charged them like valiant and 
courageous soldiers for some while. But, seeing that the 
Pirates were very dexterous at their arms, and their Governor 
with many of their companions killed, they began to retreat 
towards the wood. Here they designed to save themselves 
with more advantage ; but, before they could reach it, the 
greatest part of them were unfortunately killed by the hands 
of the Pirates. Thus they left the victory unto these new- 
come enemies, who had no considerable loss of men in this 
battle, and but very few wounded, howbeit the skirmish 
continued for the space of four hours. They entered the 
town, though not without great resistance of such as were 
within, who defended themselves as long as was possible, think- 
ing by their defence to hinder the pillage. Hereupon many, 
seeing the enemy within the town, shut themselves up in 
their own houses, and thence made several shot against the 
Pirates, who perceiving the mischief of this disadvantage, 
presently began to threaten them saying : // you surrender 
not voluntarily, you shall soon see the town in a flame, and your 
wives and children torn in pieces before your faces. With these 
menaces the Spaniards submitted entirely to the discretion of 
the Pirates, believing they could not continue there long and 
would soon be forced to dislodge. 

As soon as the Pirates had possessed themselves of the town, 
they enclosed all the Spaniards, both men, women, and children. 



132 PUT TO RANSOM 

and slaves, in several churches ; and gathered all the goods 
they could find by way of pillage. Afterwards they searched 
the whole country round about the town, bringing [in] day by 
day many goods and prisoners, with much provision. With 
this they fell to banqueting among themselves and making 
great cheer after their customary way, without remembering 
the poor prisoners, whom they permitted to starve in the 
churches for hunger. In the meanwhile they ceased not to 
torment them daily after an inhuman manner, thereby to 
make them confess where they hid their goods, moneys, and 
other things, though little or nothing was left them. Unto 
this effect they punished also the women and little children, 
giving them nothing to eat ; whereby the greatest part 
perished. 

When they could find no more to rob, and that provisions 
began to grow scarce, they thought it convenient to depart and 
seek new fortunes in other places. Hence they intimated to 
the prisoners : They should find moneys to ransom themselves, 
else they should be all transported to Jamaica. Which being 
done, if they did not pay a second ransom for the town, they 
would turn every house into ashes. The Spaniards, hearing these 
severe menaces, nominated among themselves four fellow- 
prisoners to go and seek for the above-mentioned contribu- 
tions. But the Pirates, to the intent they should return 
speedily with the ransoms prescribed, tormented several in 
their presence, before they departed, with all the rigour 
imaginable. After few days, the Spaniards returned from the 
fatigue of their unreasonable commissions, teUing Captain 
Morgan : We have run up and down, and searched all the 
neighbouring woods and places we most suspected, and yet have 
not been able to find any of our own party, nor consequently any 
fruit of our embassy. But if you are pleased to have a little longer 
patience with us, we shall certainly cause all that you demand 
to be paid within the space of fifteen days. Captain Morgan was 
contented, as it should seem, to grant them this petition. 
But, not long after, there came into the town seven or eight 
Pirates, who had been ranging the woods and fields, and got 
thereabouts some considerable booty. These brought among 
other prisoners a certain negro, whom they had taken 
with letters about him. Captain Morgan having perused them, 
found they were from the Governor of Santiago, being written 



FRENCH AND ENGLISH DISCORD 133 

to some of the prisoners ; wherein he told them : They should 
not make loo -much hasle to pay any ransom for their town or 
persons or any other pretext. But, on the contrary, they should put 
off the Pirates as well as they could with excuses and delays, expect- 
ing to he relieved by him within a short while, when he would 
certainly come to their aid. This intelligence being heard by 
Captain Morgan, he immediately gave orders that all they had 
robbed should be carried on board the ships. And, withal, he 
intimated to the Spaniards that the very next day they should 
pay their ransoms forasmuch as he would not wait one moment 
longer but reduce the whole town to ashes in case they failed 
to perform the sum demanded. 

With this intimation Captain Morgan made no mention unto 
the Spaniards of the letters he had intercepted. Whereupon 
they made him answer that it was totally impossible for them to 
give such a sum of money in so short a space of time, seeing 
their fellow-townsmen were not to be found in all the country 
thereabouts. Captain Morgan knew full well their intentions, 
and, withal, thought it not convenient to remain there any 
longer time. Hence he demanded of them only 500 oxen or 
cows, together with sufficient salt wherewith to salt them. 
Hereunto he added only this condition, that they should carry 
them on board his ships, which they promised to do. Thus he 
departed with all his men, taking with him only six of the 
principal prisoners, as pledges of what he intended. The 
next day the Spaniards brought the cattle and salt to the ships, 
and required the prisoners. But Captain Morgan refused to 
deliver them till such time as they helped his men to kill and 
salt the beeves. This was likewise performed in great haste, he 
not caring to stay there any longer, lest he should be surprised 
by the forces that were gathering against him. Having received 
all on board his vessels, he set at liberty the prisoners he had 
kept as hostages of his demands. ^ While these things were in 
agitation, there happened to arise some dissensions between the 
Englishmen and the French. The occasion of their discord was 
as follows : A certain Frenchman being employed in killing 
and salting one of the beeves, an English Pirate came to him 
and took away the marrow-bones he had taken out of the ox ; 
which sort of meat these people esteem very much. Hereupon 
they challenged one another. Being come unto the place of 
duel, the Englishmari drew his sword treacherously against 



134 RETURN TO JAMAICA 

the Frenchman, wounding him in the back, before he had put 
himself into a just posture of defence ; whereby he suddenly 
fell dead upon the place. The other Frenchmen, desirous to 
revenge this base action, made an insurrection against the 
English. But Captain Morgan soon extinguished this flame, 
by commanding the criminal to be bound in chains, and thus 
carried to Jamaica, promising to them all he would see justice 
done upon him. For, although it were permitted unto him 
to challenge his adversary, yet it was not lawful to kill him 
treacherously, as he did. 

As soon as all things were in readiness and on board the ships, 
and likewise the prisoners set at liberty, they sailed thence, 
directing their course to a certain island, where Captain 
Morgan intended to make a dividend of what they had pur- 
chased in that voyage. Being arrived at the place assigned, 
they found nigh the value of 50,000 pieces-of-eight, both in 
money and goods. The sum being known, it caused a general 
resentment and grief, to see such a small purchase, which was 
not sufficient to pay their debts at Jamaica. Hereupon 
Captain Morgan propounded to them they should think upon 
some other enterprize and pillage before they returned home. 
But the Frenchmen, not being able to agree with the English, 
separated from their company, leaving Captain Morgan alone 
with those of his own nation, notwithstanding all the 
persuasions he used to induce them to continue in his company. 
Thus they parted with all external signs of friendship. Captain 
Morgan reiterating his promises unto them that he would see 
justice done upon that criminal. This he performed ; for, 
being arrived at Jamaica, he caused him to be hanged, which 
was all the satisfaction the French Pirates could expect. 



CHAPTER VI 

I Captain Morgan resolves to attack and plunder the city of Porto 
Bello. Unto this effect he equips a fleet, and with Utile 
expense and small forces takes the said place 



Some nations may think that, the French having deserted 
Captain Morgan, the English alone could not have sufficient 
courage to attempt such great actions as before. But Captain 
Morgan, who always communicated vigour with his words, 
infused such spirits into his men as were able to put every one 
of them instantly upon new designs, they being all persuaded 
by his reasons that the sole execution of his orders would be a 
certain means of obtaining great riches. This persuasion had 
such influence upon their minds that with inimitable courage 
they all resolved to follow him. The same likewise did a 
certain Pirate of Campeche, who in this occasion joined with 
Captain Morgan to seek new fortunes under his conduct, and 
greater advantages than he had found before. Thus Captain 
Morgan in a few days gathered a fleet of nine sail, between 
ships and great boats, wherein he had four-hundred-and- 
threescore military men. 

After that all things were in good posture of readiness, 
they put forth to sea. Captain Morgan imparting the design 
he had in his mind unto nobody for that present. He only 
told them on several occasions that he held as indubitable he 
should make a good fortune by that voyage, if strange occur- 
rences altered not the course of his designs. They directed 
their course towards the continent, where they arrived in few 
days upon the coast of Costa Rica, with all their fleet entire. 
No sooner had they discovered land than Captain Morgan 
declared his intentions to the Captains, and presently after 
unto all the rest of the company. He told them he intended 
in that expedition to plunder Porto Bello^'and that he would 

135 / 



136 EXPEDITION TO PORTO BELLO 

perform it by night, being resolved to put the whole city to 
the sack, not the least corner escaping his diligence. More- 
over, to encourage them, he added : This enterprize could not 
fail to succeed well, seeing he had kept it secret in his mind 
without revealing it to anybody ; whereby they could not have 
notice of his coming. Unto this proposition some made answer : 
They had not a sufficient number of men wherewith to assault so 
strong and great a city. But Captain Morgan replied : // our 
number is small, our hearts are great. And the fewer persons we 
are, the more union and better shares we shall have in the spoil. 
Hereupon, being stimulated with the ambition of those vast 
riches they promised themselves from their good success, they 
unanimously concluded to venture upon that design. But 
now, to the intent my reader may better comprehend the 
incomparable boldness of this exploit, it may be necessary 
to say something beforehand of the city of Porto Bello. 

The city which bears this name in America is seated in the 
Province of Costa Rica, under the latitude of lo degrees 
North, at the distance of 14 leagues from the Gulf of Darien, 
and 8 Westwards from the port called Nombre de Dios. It is 
judged to be the strongest place that the King of Spain 
possesses in all the West Indies, excepting two, that is to say 
Havana and Cartagena. Here are two castles, almost in- 
expugnable, that defend the city, being situated at the entry 
of the port, so that no ship or boat can pass without permission. 
The garrison consists of three hundred soldiers, and the town 
constantly inhabited by four hundred families, more or less. 
The merchants dwell not here, but only reside for awhile, 
when the galleons come or go from Spain, by reason of the 
unhealthiness of the air, occasioned by certain vapours that 
exhale from the mountains. Notwithstanding, their chief 
warehouses are at Porto Bello, howbeit their habitations are 
all the year long at Panama, whence they bring the plate upon 
mules at such times as the fair begins, and when the ships 
belonging to the Company of Negroes arrive here to sell slaves. 

Captain Morgan, who knew very well all the avenues of this 
city, as also all the neighbouring coasts, arrived in the dusk 
of the evening at the place called Puerto de Naos, distant ten 
leagues towards the West of Porto Bello. Being come unto 
this place, they mounted the river in their ships, as far as 
another harbour called Puerto Pontin, where they came to an 



EXPEDITION TO PORTO BELLO 137 

anchor. Here they put themselves immediately into boats 
and canoes, leaving in the ships only a few men to keep them 
and conduct them the next day unto the port. About mid- 
night they came to a certain place called Estera Longa Lemos, 
where they all went on shore, and marched by land to the first 
posts of the city. They had in their company a certain 
Englishman who had been formerly a prisoner in those parts 
and who now served them for a guide. Unto him, and three 
or four more, they gave commission to take the sentry, if 
possible, or kill him upon the place. But they laid hands on 
him and apprehended him with such cunning that he had no 
time to give warning with his musket or make any other noise. 
Thus they brought him, with his hands bound, unto Captain 
Morgan, who asked him : How things went in the city, and what 
forces they had ; with many other circumstances, which he was 
desirous to know. After every question, they made him a 
thousand menaces to kill him, in case he declared not the truth. 
Thus they began to advance towards the city, carrying always 
the said sentry bound before them. Having marched about 
one quarter of a league, they came unto the castle that is nigh 
unto the city, which presently they closely surrounded, so that 
no person could get either in or out of the said fortress. 

Being thus posted under the walls of the castle. Captain 
Morgan commanded the sentry whom they had taken prisoner 
to speak unto those that were within, charging them to sur- 
render and deliver themselves up to his discretion — otherwise 
they should be all cut to pieces, without giving quarter to any 
one. But they would hearken to none of these threats, beginning 
instantly to fire ; which gave notice unto the city, and this 
was suddenly alarmed. Yet, notwithstanding, although the 
Governor and soldiers of the said castle made as great resist- 
ance as could be performed, they were constrained to 
surrender unto the Pirates. These no sooner had taken the 
castle but they resolved to be as good as their words, in putting 
the Spaniards to the sword, thereby to strike a terror into the 
rest of the city. Hereupon, having shut up all the soldiers 
and officers as prisoners into one room, they instantly set fire 
to the powder (whereof they found great quantity), and blew 
up the whole castle into the air, with all the Spaniards that were 
within. This being done, they pursued the course of their 
victory, falling upon the city, which as yet was not in order 



138 ASSAULT OF THE CASTLE 

to receive them. Many of the inhabitants cast their precious 
jewels and moneys into wells and cisterns, or hid them in other 
places underground, to excuse, as much as were possible, 
their being totally robbed. One party of the Pirates, being 
assigned to this purpose, ran immediately to the cloisters, and 
took as many religious men and women as they could find. 
The Governor of the city not being able to rally the citizens 
through the huge confusion of the town, retired unto one of 
the castles remaining, and thence began to fire incessantly at 
the Pirates. But these were not in the least negligent either 
to assault him or defend themselves with all the courage 
imaginable. Thus it was observable that, amidst the horror of 
the assault, they made very few shot in vain. For, aiming 
with great dexterity at the mouths of the guns, the Spaniards 
were certain to lose one or two men every time they charged 
each gun anew. 

The assault of this castle where the Governor was continued 
very furious on both sides, from break of day until noon. 
Yea, about this time of the day the case was very dubious 
which party should conquer or be conquered. At last the 
Pirates, perceiving they had lost many men and as yet advanced 
but little towards the gaining either this or the other castles 
remaining, thought to make use of fireballs, which they threw 
with their hands, designing if possible to burn the doors of 
the castle. But, going about to put this into execution, 
the Spaniards from the wall let fall great quantities of 
stones and earthen pots full of powder and other combustible 
matter, which forced them to desist from that attempt. 
Captain Morgan, seeing this generous defence made by the 
Spaniards, began to despair of the -vvhole success of the 
enterprize. Hereupon many faint and calm meditations came 
into his mind ; neither could he determine which way to turn 
himself in that straitness of affairs. Being involved in these 
thoughts, he was suddenly animated to continue the assault 
by seeing the English colours put forth at one of the lesser 
castles, then entered by his men, of whom he presently after 
spied a troop that came to meet him, proclaiming victory 
with loud shouts of joy. This instantly put him upon new 
resolutions of making new efforts to take the rest of the castles 
that stood out against him, especially seeing the chiefest 
citizens were fled unto them and had conveyed thither great 



CAPTURE OF PORTO BELLO 139 

part of their riches, with all the plate belonging to the churches 
and other things dedicated to divine service. 

Unto this effect, therefore, he ordered ten or twelve ladders 
to be made, in all possible haste, so broad that three or four 
men at once might ascend by them. These being finished, 
he commanded all the religious men and women whom he 
had taken prisoners to fix them against the walls of the castle. 
Thus much he had beforehand threatened the Governor to 
perform, in case he delivered not the castle. But his answer 
was : He would never surrender himself alive. Captain 
Morgan was much persuaded that the Governor would not 
employ his utmost forces, seeing religious women and 
ecclesiastical persons exposed in the front of the soldiers to the 
greatest dangers. Thus the ladders, as I have said, were put 
into the hands of religious persons of both sexes ; and these 
were forced, at the head of the companies, to raise and apply 
them to the walls. But Captain Morgan was fully deceived 
in his judgment of this design. For the Governor who acted 
like a brave and courageous soldier, refused not, in performance 
of his duty, to use his utmost endeavours to destroy whosoever 
came near the walls. The religious men and women ceased 
not to cry unto him and beg of him by all the Saints of Heaven 
he would deliver the castle, and hereby spare both his and their 
own lives. But nothing could prevail with the obstinacy and 
fierceness that had possessed the Governor's mind. Thus 
many of the religious men and nuns were killed before they 
could fix the ladders — which at last being done, though with 
great loss of the said rehgious people, the Pirates mounted 
them in great numbers, and with no less valour, having fireballs 
in their hands, and earthen pots full of powder — all which 
things, being now at the top of the walls, they kindled and 
cast in among the Spaniards. 

This effort of the Pirates was very great,- insomuch as the 
Spaniards could no longer resist nor defend the castle, which 
was now entered. Hereupon they all threw down their arms, 
and craved quarter for their lives. Only the Governor of the 
city would admit or crave no mercy, but rather killed many of 
the Pirates with his own hands, and not a few of his own 
soldiers, because they did not stand to their arms. And, 
although the Pirates asked him if he would have quarter, yet 
he constantly answered : By no means : I had rather die as 



140 THE PIRATES IN PORTO BELLO 

a valiant soldier than he hanged as a coward. They endeavoured, 
as much as they could, to take him prisoner. But he defended 
himself so obstinately that they were forced to kill him, 
notwithstanding all the cries and tears of his own wife and 
daughter, who begged of him upon their knees he would 
demand quarter and save his life. When the Pirates had 
possessed themselves of the castle, which was about night, 
they enclosed therein all the prisoners they had taken, placing 
the women and men by themselves with some guards upon 
them. All the wounded were put into a certain apartment by 
itself, to the intent their own complaints might be the cure of 
their diseases, for no other was afforded them. 

This being done, they fell to eating and drinking after 
their usual manner — that is to say, committing in both these 
things all manner of debauchery and excess. These two vices 
were immediately followed by many insolent actions of rape 
and adultery committed upon very honest women, as well 
married as virgins, who being threatened with the sword 
were constrained to submit their bodies to the violence 
of these lewd and wicked men. After such manner 
they delivered themselves up to all sort of debauchery 
of this kind, that if there had been found only fifty 
courageous men, they might easily have retaken the city, 
and killed all the Pirates. The next day, having plundered 
all they could find, they began to examine some of the 
prisoners (who had been persuaded by their companions to 
say they were the richest of the town), charging them severely 
to discover where they had hidden their riches and goods. 
But, not being able to extort anything out of them, as they 
were not the right persons who possessed any wealth, they at 
last resolved to torture them. This they performed with 
such cruelty that many of them died upon the rack, or pres- 
ently after. Sooij after, the President of Panama had news 
brought him of the pillage and ruin of Porto Bello. This 
intelligence caused him to employ all his care and industry to 
raise forces, with design to pursue and cast out the Pirates 
thence. But these cared little for what extraordinary means 
the President used, as having their ships nigh at hand and 
being determined to set fire unto the city and retreat. They 
had now been at Porto Bello fifteen days, in which space of 
time they had lost many of their men, both by the unhealthiness 



CAPT. MORGAN AT PORTO BELLO 141 

of the country and the extravagant debaucheries they had 
committed. 

Hereupon they prepared for a departure, carrying on board 
their ships all the pillage they had gotten. But, before all, 
they provided the fleet with sufficient victuals for the voyage. 
While these things were getting ready. Captain Morgan sent 
an injunction unto the prisoners, that they should pay him 
a ransom for the city, or else he would by fire consume it to 
ashes and blow up all the castles into the air. Withal he 
commanded them to send speedily two persons to seek and 
procure the sum he demanded, which amounted to 100,000 
pieces-of-eight. Unto this effect two men were sent to the 
President of Panama, who gave him an account of all these 
tragedies. The President, having now a body of men in a 
readiness, set forth immediately towards Porto Bello, to 
encounter the Pirates before their retreat. But these people, 
hearing of his coming, instead of flying away went out to meet 
him at a narrow passage through which of necessity he ought to 
pass. Here they placed an hundred men very well armed, the 
which at the first encounter put to flight a good party of those 
of Panama. This accident obliged the President to retire for 
that time, as not being yet in a posture of strength to proceed 
any farther. Presently after this encounter, he sent a message 
unto Captain Morgan, to tell him : That, in case he departed 
not suddenly with all his forces from Porto Bello, he ought to 
expect no quarter for himself nor his companions, when he 
should take them, as he hoped soon to do. Captain Morgan, who 
feared not his threats, as knowing he had a secure retreat 
in his ships which were nigh at hand, made him answer : He 
wouldnot deliver the castles before he had received the contribution- 
money he had demanded. Which in case it were not paid down, 
he would certainly burn the whole city, and then leave it, demolish- 
ing beforehand the castles and killing the prisoners. 

The Governor of Panama perceived by this answer no means 
would serve to moUify the hearts of the Pirates, nor reduce 
them to reason. Hereupon he determined to leave them, as 
also those of the city, whom he came to reHeve, involved in 
the difficulties of making the best agreement they could with 
their enemies. Thus in few days more the miserable citizens 
gathered the contribution wherein they were fined, and brought 
the entire sum of ,100,000 pieces-of-eight unto the Pirates for 



142 DEPARTURE FOR CUBA 

a ransom of the cruel captivity they were fallen into. But 
the President of Panama, by these transactions, was brought 
into an extreme admiration, considering that four-hundred 
men had been able to take such a great city with so many 
strong castles, especially seeing they had no pieces of cannon 
nor other great guns wherewith to raise batteries against them. 
And, what was more, knowing that the citizens of Porto Bello 
had always great repute of being good soldiers themselves, 
and who had never wanted courage in their own defence. 
This astonishment was so great that it occasioned him, for 
to be satisfied herein, to send a messenger unto Captain 
Morgan, desiring him to send him some small pattern of those 
arms wherewith he had taken with such violence so great a 
city. Captain Morgan received this messenger very kindly, 
and treated him with great civility. Which being done, he 
gave him a pistol and a few small bullets of lead, to carry back 
unto the President, his master, telling him withal : He desired 
him to accept that slender pattern of the arms wherewith he had 
taken Porto Bello, and keep them for a twelvemonth ; after which 
time he promised to come to Panama and fetch them away. The 
Governor of Panama returned the present very soon to Captain 
Morgan, giving him thanks for the favour of lending him 
such weapons as he needed not, and withal sent him a ring of 
gold, with this message : That he desired him not to give him- 
self the labour of coming to Panama, as he had done to Porto 
Bello, for he did certify to him, he should not speed so well here 
as he had done there. 

After these transactions. Captain Morgan (having provided 
his fleet with all necessaries, and taken with him the best guns 
of the castles, nailing the rest which he could not carry away) 
set sail from Porto Bello with all his ships. With these he 
arrived in few days unto the island of Cuba, where he sought 
out a place wherein with all quiet and repose he might make the 
dividend of the spoil they had gotten. They found in ready 
money 250,000 pieces-of-eight, besides all other merchandizes, 
as cloth, linen, silks, and other goods. With this rich purchase 
they sailed again thence unto their common place of ren- 
dezvous, Jamaica. Being arrived, they passed here some time 
in all sorts of vices and debauchery, according to their common 
manner of doing, spending with huge prodigahty what others 
had gained with no small labour and toil. 



CHAPTER VII 

Captain Morgan takes the city of Maracaibo, on the coast of 
New Venezuela. Piracies committed in those seas. Ruin 
of three Spanish ships that were set forth to hinder the 
robberies of the Pirates 

Not long after the arrival of the Pirates at Jamaica, being 
precisely that short time they needed to lavish away all the 
riches above-mentioned, they concluded upon another enter- 
prize whereby to seek new fortunes. Unto this effect Captain 
Morgan gave orders to all the Commanders of his ships to meet 
together at the island called De la Vaca, or Cow Isle, seated 
on the South side of the isle of Hispaniola, as has been men- 
tioned above. As soon as they came to this place, there 
flocked unto them great numbers of other Pirates, both French 
and English, by reason the name of Captain Morgan was now 
rendered famous in all the neighbouring countries for the great 
enterprizes he had performed. There was at that present at 
Jamaica an English ship newly come from New England, 
well mounted with thirty-six guns. This vessel likewise, by 
order of the Governor of Jamaica, came to join with Captain 
Morgan to strengthen his fleet and give him greater courage to 
attempt things of huge consequence. With this supply 
Captain Morgan judged himself sufficiently strong, as having 
a ship of such port being the greatest of his fleet, in his com- 
pany. Notwithstanding, there being in the same place 
another great vessel that carried 24 iron guns and twelve of 
brass, belonging to the French, Captain Morgan endeavoured 
as much as he could to join this ship in like manner unto his 
own. But the French, not daring to repose any trust in the 
English, of whose actions were not a little jealous, denied 
absolutely to consent unto any such thing. 
/ The French Pirates belonging to this great ship had accident- 
ally met at sea an English vessel ; and, being then under an 

M3 



144 CAPTAIN MORGAN'S TREACHERY 

extreme necessity of victuals, they had taken some provisions 
out of the Enghsh ship without paying for them, as having 
peradventure no ready money on board. Only they had 
given them bills-of-exchange, for Jamaica and Tortuga, to 
receive money there for what they had taken. Captain 
Morgan, having notice of this accident and perceiving he could 
not prevail with the French Captain to follow him in that 
expedition, resolved to lay hold on this occasion as a pretext 
to ruin the French and seek his own revenge. Hereupon he 
invited, with dissimulation, the French commander and 
several of his men to dine with him on board the great ship 
that was come from Jamaica, as was said before. Being 
come thither, he made them all prisoners, pretending the 
injury aforementioned done to the Enghsh vessel in taking 
away some few provisions without pay. 

This unjust action of Captain Morgan was soon followed by 
divine punishment, as we may very rationally conceive. The 
manner I shall instantly relate. Captain Morgan, presently 
after he had taken the French prisoners abovesaid, called a 
council to deliberate what place they should first pitch 
upon, in the course of this new expedition. At this council 
it was determined to go to the isle of Savona, there to wait 
for the fioia which was then expected from Spain, and take any 
of the Spanish vessels that might chance to straggle from the 
rest. This resolution being taken, they began on board the 
great ship to feast one another for joy of their new voyage and 
happy council, as they hoped it would prove. In testimony 
hereof, they drank many healths, and discharged many guns, 
as the common sign of mirth among seamen used to be. Most 
of the men being drunk, by what accident is not known the ship 
suddenly was blown up into the air, with 350 Enghshmen, 
besides the French prisoners above-mentioned that were in 
the hold. Of all which number there escaped only thirty men, 
who were in the great cabin at some distance from the main 
force of the powder. Many more 'tis thought might have 
escaped, had they not been so much overtaken with wine. 

The loss of such a great ship brought much consternation 
and conflict of mind upon the Enghsh. They knew not whom 
to blame ; but at last the accusation was laid upon the 
French prisoners, whom they suspected to have fired the 
powder of the ship wherein they were, out of design to revenge 



A GREAT SHIP BLOWN UP 145 

themselves, though with the loss of their own lives. Hereupon 
they sought to be revenged on the French anew, and accumu- 
late new accusations unto the former, whereby to seize the 
ship and all that was in it. With this design they forged 
another pretext against the said ship, by saying the French 
designed to commit piracy upon the English. The grounds 
of this accusation were given them by a commission from the 
Governor of Barracoa, found on board the French vessel, 
wherein were these words : That the said Governor did permit 
the French to trade in all Spanish ports, etc. . . . as also 
to cruize upon the English Pirates in what place soever they 
could find them, because of the multitude of hostilities which they 
had committed against the subjects of his Catholic Majesty in 
time of peace betwixt the two Crowns. This Commission for 
trade was interpreted by the English as an express order to 
exercise piracy and war against them, notwithstanding it 
was only a bare licence for coming into the Spanish ports ; 
the cloak of which permission were those words inserted : 
That they should cruize upon the Efiglish. And, although the 
French did sufficiently expound the true sense of the said 
Commission, yet they could not clear themselves unto Captain 
Morgan nor his council. But, in lieu hereof, the ship and men 
were seized and sent unto Jamaica. Here they also en- 
deavoured to obtain justice and the restitution of their ship, 
by all the means possible. But all was in vain ; for, instead of 
justice, they were long time detained in prison and threatened 
with hanging. 

Eight days after the loss of the said ship. Captain Morgan 
commanded the bodies of the miserable wretches who were 
blown up to be searched for, as they floated upon the waters of 
the sea. This he did, not out of any design of affording them 
Christian burial, but only to obtain the spoil of their clothes 
and other attire. And, if any had golden rings on their fingers, 
these were cut off for purchase, leaving them in that condition 
exposed to the voracity of the monsters of the sea. At last 
they set sail for the isle of Savona, being the place of their 
assignation. They were in all 15 vessels. Captain Morgan 
commanding the biggest, which carried only 14 small guns. 
The number of men belonging to this fleet were nine-hundred- 
and-threescore. In few days after, they arrived at the Cape 
called Cabo de Lobos. on the South side of the isle of His- 



146 STRATAGEM OF THE SPANIARDS 

paniola, between Cape Tiburon and Cape Punta d'Espada. 
Hence they could not pass, by reason of contrary winds that 
continued the space of three weeks, notwithstanding all the 
endeavours Captain Morgan used to get forth, leaving no 
means unattempted thereunto. At the end of this time they 
doubled the cape, and presently after spied an English vessel 
at a distance. Having spoken with her, they found she came 
from England, and bought of her for ready money some 
provisions they stood in need of. 

Captain Morgan proceeded in the course of his voyage, till 
he came unto the port of Ocoa. Here he landed some of his 
men, sending them into the woods to seek water and what 
provisions they could find, the better to spare such as he had 
already on board his fleet. They killed many beasts, and 
among other animals some horses. But the Spaniards, being 
not well satisfied at their hunting, attempted to lay a strata- 
gem for the Pirates. Unto this purpose they ordered three or 
four hundred men to come from the city of San Domingo, not 
far distant from this port, and desired them to hunt in all the 
parts thereabouts adjoining the sea, to the intent that, if 
any Pirates should return, they might find no subsistence. 
Within a few days the same Pirates returned, with design to 
hunt. But, finding nothing to kill, a party of them, being 
about fifty in number, straggled farther on into the woods. 
The Spaniards, who watched all their motions, gathered a great 
herd of cows, and set two or three men to keep them. The 
Pirates having spied this herd, killed a sufficient number there- 
of ; and, although the Spaniards could see them at a distance, 
yet they would not hinder their work for the present. But, 
as soon as they attempted to carry them away, they set upon 
them with all fury imaginable, crying : Mata, mata ! that is, 
Kill, kill ! Thus the Pirates were soon compelled to quit the 
prey, and retreat towards their ships as well as they could. 
This they performed, notwithstanding, in good order, retiring 
from time to time by degrees ; and, when they had any good 
opportunity, discharging full volleys of shot upon the 
Spaniards. By this means the Pirates killed many of the 
enemies, though with some loss on their own side. 

The rest of the Spaniards, seeing what damage they had 
sustained, endeavoured to save themselves by flight, and 
carry off the dead bodies and wounded of their companions. 



ARRIVAL AT SAVONA 147 

The Pirates, perceiving them to flee, could not content them- 
selves with what hurt they had already done, but pursued 
them speedily into the woods, and killed the greatest part of 
those that were remaining. The next day Captain Morgan, 
being extremely offended at what had passed, went himself 
with 200 men into the woods, to seek for the rest of the 
Spaniards. But, finding nobody there, he revenged his wrath 
upon the houses of the poor and miserable rustics that inhabit 
scatteringly those fields and woods : of which he burnt a 
great number. With this he returned unto his ships, something 
more satisfied in his mind, for having done some considerable 
damage unto the enemy, which was always his most ardent 
desire. 

The huge impatience wherewith Captain Morgan had waited 
now this long while for some of his ships, which were not yet 
arrived, made him resolve to set sail without them, and steer 
his course for the isle of Savona, the place he had always 
designed. Being arrived there, and not finding any of his 
ships as yet come, he was more impatient and concerned than 
before, as fearing their loss, or that he must proceed without 
them. Nothwithstanding, he waited for their arrival some 
few days longer. In the meanwhile, having no great plenty of 
provisions, he sent a crew of 150 men to the isle of Hispaniola, 
to pillage some towns that were nigh unto the city of San 
Domingo. But the Spaniards, having had intelligence of 
their coming, were now so vigilant and in such good posture 
of defence that the Pirates thought it not convenient to assault 
them, choosing rather to return empty-handed unto Captain 
Morgan's presence than to perish in that desperate enter- 
prize. 

At last Captain Morgan, seeing the other ships did not come, 
made a review of his people, and found only five-hundred men, 
more or less. The ships that were wanting were seven, he 
having only eight in his company, of which the greatest part 
were very small. Thus, having hitherto resolved to cruize 
upon the coasts of Caracas, and plunder all the towns and 
villages he could meet, finding himself at present with such 
small forces, he changed his resolution, by the advice of a 
French Captain that belonged to his fleet . This Frenchman had 
served L'Ollonais in like enterprizes, and was at the taking 
of Maracaibo, whereby he knew all the entries, passages, 



148 THE ISLAND OF RUBA 

forces, and means how to put in execution the same again 
in the company of Captain Morgan, unto whom, having made 
a full relation of all, he concluded to sack it again the second 
time, as being himself persuaded, with all his men, of the 
facility the Frenchman propounded. Hereupon they weighed 
anchor, and steered their course towards Curasao. Being 
come within sight of that island, they landed at another, which 
is nigh unto it, and is called Ruba, seated about twelve leagues 
from Curasao, towards the West. This island is defended but 
by a slender garrison, and is inhabited by Indians, who are 
subject to the Crown of Spain, and speak Spanish by reason of 
the Roman Catholic religion, which is here cultivated by some 
few priests that are sent from time to time from the neighbour- 
ing continent. 

The inhabitants of this isle exercise a certain commerce 
or trade with the Pirates that go and come this way. These 
buy of the islanders sheep, lambs, and kids, which they 
exchange unto them for hnen, thread, and other things of this 
kind. The country is very dry and barren, the whole sub- 
stance thereof consisting in those three things above-mentioned, 
and in a small quantity of wheat, which is of no bad quality. 
This isle produces a great number of venomous insects, as 
vipers, spiders, and others. These last are so pernicious here 
that, if any man is bitten by them, he dies mad. And the 
manner of recovering such persons is to tie them very fast 
both hands and feet, and in this condition to leave them for 
the space of four-and-twenty hours without eating or drinking 
the least thing imaginable. Captain Morgan, as was said, 
having cast anchor before this island, bought of the inhabitants 
many sheep, lambs, and also wood, which he needed for all 
his fleet. Having been there two days he set sail again, in the 
time of the night, to the intent they might not see what course 
he steered. 

The next day they arrived at the sea of Maracaibo, having 
always great care of not being seen from Vigilias, for which 
reason they anchored out of the sight of the watch-tower. 
Night being come, they set sail again towards the land, and the 
next morning by break of day found themselves directly over 
against the bar of the lake above-mentioned. The Spaniards had 
built another fort since the action of L'Ollonais, whence they 
did now fire continually against the Pirates, while they were 



JTu Tofvne g^ Fuerto del Brrnc^ tak^ t^r-' 




Puerto del Principe taken and sacked 



MORGAN SAILS FOR MARACAIBO 151 

putting their men into boats for to land. The dispute con- 
tinued very hot on both sides, being managed with huge 
courage and valour from morning till dark night. This being 
come, Captain Morgan, in the obscurity thereof, drew nigh 
unto the fort ; which having examined, he found nobody in 
it, the Spaniards having deserted it not long before. They 
left behind them a match kindled nigh unto a train of powder, 
wherewith they designed to blow up the Pirates and the whole 
fortress, as soon as they were in it. This design had taken 
effect, had the Pirates failed to discover it the space of one 
quarter of an hour. But Captain Morgan prevented the 
mischief by snatching away the match with all speed, whereby 
he saved both his own and his companions' lives. They found 
here great quantity of powder, whereof he provided his fleet ; 
and afterwards demolished part of the walls, nailing sixteen 
pieces of ordnance, which carried from 12 to 24 pound of bullet. 
Here they found also great number of muskets and military 
provisions. 

The next day they commanded the ships to enter the bar ; 
among which, they divided the powder, muskets, and other 
things they found in the fort. These things being done, they 
embarked again, to continue their course towards Maracaibo. 
But the waters were very low, whereby they could not pass a 
certain bank that lies at the entry of the lake. Hereupon they 
were compelled to put themselves into canoes and small boats, 
with which they arrived the next day before Maracaibo, 
having no other defence but some small pieces which they 
could carry in the said boats. Being landed, they ran immedi- 
ately to the fort called De la Barra, which they found in like 
manner as the preceding, without any person in it ; for all were 
fled before them into the woods, leaving also the town without 
any people, unless a few miserable poor folk who had nothing 
to lose. 

As soon as they had entered the town, the Pirates searched 
every corner thereof, to see if they could find any people that 
were hidden who might offend them at unawares. Not 
finding anybody, every party, according as they came out of 
their several ships, chose what houses they pleased to them- 
selves, the best they could find. The church was deputed for 
the common corps de garde, where they lived after their military 
manner, committing many insolent actions. The next day 



152 GIBRALTAR FOUND EMPTY 

after their arrival, they sent a troop of lOo men to seek for the 
inhabitants and their goods. These returned the next day 
following, bringing with them to the number of thirty persons, 
between men, women, and children, and fifty mules laden 
with several good merchandize. All these miserable prisoners 
were put to the rack, to make them confess where the rest of 
the inhabitants were and their goods. Amongst other tor- 
tures then used, one was to stretch their hmbs with cords, and 
at the same time beat them with sticks and other instruments. 
Others had burning matches placed betwixt their fingers, 
which were thus burnt ahve. Others had slender cords or 
matches twisted about their heads, till their eyes burst out of 
the skull. Thus all sort of inhuman cruelties were executed 
upon those innocent people. Those who would not confess, or 
who had nothing to declare, died under the hands of those 
tyrannical men. These tortures and racks continued for the 
space of three whole weeks, in which time they ceased not to 
send out, daily, parties of men to seek for more people to 
torment and rob ; they never returning home without booty 
and new riches. 

Captain Morgan, having now gotten by degrees into his hands 
about one hundred of the chiefest families, with all their goods, 
at last resolved to go to Gibraltar, even as L'OUonais had done 
before. With this design he equipped his fleet, providing it 
very sufficiently with all necessary things. He put likewise 
on board all the prisoners ; and thus, weighing anchor, set sail 
for the said place, with resolution to hazard the battle. They 
had sent before them some prisoners unto Gibraltar, to 
denounce unto the inhabitants they should surrender : other- 
wise Captain Morgan would certainly put them all to the 
sword, without giving quarter to any person he should find 
alive. Not long after, he arrived with his fleet before Gibraltar, 
whose inhabitants received him with continual shooting of 
great cannon-bullets. But the Pirates, instead of fainting 
hereat, ceased not to encourage one another, saying : We 
must make one meal upon hitter things before we come to taste the 
sweetness of the sugar this place affords. 

The next day, very early in the morning, they landed all 
their men. And, being guided by the Frenchman above- 
mentioned, they marched towards the town, not by the com- 
mon way but crossing through the woods ; which way the 



TORTURE OF AN IMBECILE 153 

Spaniards scarce thought they would have come. For, at the 
beginning of their march, they made appearance as if they 
intended to come the next and open way that led unto the 
town, hereby the better to deceive the Spaniards. But these, 
remembering as j'et full well what hostilities L'Ollonais had 
committed upon them but two years before, thought it not safe 
to expect the second brunt, and hereupon were all fled out of the 
town as fast as they could, carrying with them all their goods 
and riches as also all the powder, and having nailed all the 
great guns : insomuch as the Pirates found not one person in 
the whole city, excepting one only poor and innocent man who 
was born a fool. This man they asked whither the inhabitants 
were fled, and where they had absconded their goods. Unto 
all which questions and the like he constantly made answer : 
/ know nothing, I know nothing. But they presently put him 
to the rack, and tortured him with cords ; which torments forced 
him to cry out : Do not torture me any more, hut come with me 
and I will show you my goods and my riches. They were 
persuaded, as it should seem, he was some rich person who had 
disguised himself under those clothes so poor as also that 
innocent tongue. Hereupon they went along with him ; and 
he conducted them to a poor and miserable cottage, wherein 
he had a few earthen dishes and other things of little or no 
value ; and amongst these, three pieces-of-eight, which he had 
concealed with other trumpery underground. After this, 
they asked him his name, and he readily made answer : My 
name is Don Sebastian Sanchez, and I am brother unto the 
Governor of Maracaibo. This foolish answer, it must be con- 
ceived, these men, though never so inhuman, took for a certain 
truth. For no sooner had they heard it, but they put him 
again upon the rack, lifting him up on high with cords, and tying 
huge weights unto his feet and neck ; besides which cruel and 
stretching torment, they burnt him alive, appl5dng palm-leaves 
burning unto his face, under which miseries he died in half-an- 
hour. After his death they cut the cords wherewith they had 
stretched him, and dragged him forth into the adjoining woods, 
where they left him without burial. 

The same day they sent out a party of Pirates to seek for 
the inhabitants, upon whom they might employ their inhuman 
cruelties. These brought back with them an honest peasant 
with two daughters of his, whom they had taken prisoners. 



154 CAPTAIN MORGAN AT GIBRALTAR 

and whom they intended to torture as they used to do with 
others, in case they showed not the places where the inhabi- 
tants had absconded themselves. The peasant knew some of 
the said places, and hereupon, seeing himself threatened with 
the rack, went with the Pirates to show them. But the 
Spaniards, perceiving their enemies to range everywhere up 
and down the woods, were already fled thence much farther 
off into the thickest parts of the said woods, where they built 
themselves huts, to preserve from the violence of the weather 
those few goods they had carried with them. The Pirates 
judged themselves to be deceived by the said peasant ; and 
hereupon, to revenge their wrath upon him, notwithstanding 
all the excuses he could make and his humble supplications 
for his life, they hanged him upon a tree. 

After this, they divided into several parties, and went to 
search the plantations. For they knew the Spaniards that 
were absconded could not live upon what they found in the 
woods, without coming now and then to seek provisions at 
their own country-houses. Here they found a certain slave, 
unto whom they promised mountains of gold and that they 
would give him his liberty by transporting him unto Jamaica, 
in case he would show them the places where the inhabitants 
of Gibraltar lay hidden. This fellow conducted them unto a 
party of Spaniards, whom they instantly made all prisoners, 
commanding the said slave to kill some of them before the 
eyes of the rest ; to the intent that by this perpetrated crime 
he might never be able to leave their wicked company. The 
negro, according to their orders, committed many murders and 
insolent actions upon the Spaniards, and followed the unfor- 
tunate traces of the Pirates, who, after the space of eight days, 
returned unto Gibraltar with many prisoners and some mules 
laden with riches. They examined every prisoner by himself 
(who were in all about 250 persons) where they had absconded 
the rest of their goods, and if they knew of their fellow-towns- 
men. Such as would not confess were tormented after a most 
cruel and inhuman manner. Among the rest, there happened 
to be a certain Portuguese, who by the information of a negro 
was reported, though falsely, to be very rich. This man was 
commanded to produce his riches. But his answer was, he 
had no more than 100 pieces-of-eight in the whole world, and 
that these had been stolen from him two days before by a 



TORTURE OF A PORTUGUESE 155 

servant of his. Which words, although he sealed with many 
oaths and protestations, yet they would not believe. But 
dragging him unto the rack, without any regard unto his age, 
as being three-score years old, they stretched him with cords, 
breaking both his arms behind his shoulders. 

This cruelty went not alone. For he not being able or will- 
ing to make any other declaration than the above said, they 
put him to another sort of torment that was worse and more 
barbarous than the preceding. They tied him with small cords 
by his two thumbs and great-toes unto four stakes that were 
fixed in the ground at a convenient distance, the whole weight 
of his body being pendent in the air upon those cords. Then 
they thrashed upon the cords with great sticks and all their 
strength, so that the body of this miserable man was ready to 
perish at every stroke, under the severity of those horrible 
pains. Not satisfied as yet with this cruel torture, they took 
a stone which weighed above 200 pound, and laid it upon his 
belly, as if they intended to press him to death. At which 
time they also kindled palm-leaves, and applied the flame unto 
the face of this unfortunate Portuguese, burning with them the 
whole skin, beard, and hair. At last these cruel tyrants, seeing 
that neither with these tortures nor others they could get any- 
thing out of him, they untied the cords, and carried him, being 
almost half-dead, unto the church, where was their corps du 
garde. Here they tied him anew to one of the pillars thereof, 
leaving him in that condition, without giving him either to 
eat or drink unless very sparingly and so little as would 
scarce sustain life, for some days. Four or five being past, 
he desired that one of the prisoners might have the liberty to 
come to him, by whose means he promised he would endeavour 
to raise some money to satisfy their demands. The prisoner 
whom he required was brought unto him, and he ordered him 
to promise the Pirates 500 •pieces-of-eight for his ransom. 
But they were both deaf and obstinate at such a small sum, 
and, instead of accepting it, did beat him cruelly with cudgels, 
saying unto him : Old fellow, instead of 500 you must say 
500,000 pieces-of-eight : otherwise you shall here end your life. 
Finally, after a thousand protestations that he was but a 
miserable man and kept a poor tavern for his living, he agreed 
with them for the sum of 1000 pieces-of-eight. These he 
raised in few days, and, having paid them unto the Pirates, 



156 SEARCH FOR THE GOVERNOR 

got his liberty, although so horribly maimed in his body 
that 'tis scarce to be believed he could supervive many weeks 
after. 

Several other tortures besides these were exercised upon 
others, which this Portuguese endured not. Some were 
hanged up by the testicles or by their privy members and left 
in that condition till they fell unto the ground, those private 
parts being torn from their bodies. If with this they were 
minded to show themselves merciful to those wretches, thus 
lacerated in the most tender parts of their bodies, their mercy 
was to run them through and through with their swords, and 
by this means rid them soon of their pains and lives. Other- 
wise, if this were not done, they used to lie four or five days 
under the agonies of death, before dying. Others were cruci- 
fied by these tyrants, and with kindled matches were burnt 
between the joints of their fingers and toes. Others had their 
feet put into the fire, and thus were left to be roasted alive. 
At last, having used both these and other cruelties with the 
white men, they began to practice the same over again with 
the negroes, their slaves, who were treated with no less 
inhumanity than their masters. 

Among these slaves was found one who promised Captain 
Morgan to conduct him unto a certain river belonging to the 
lake, where he should find a ship and four boats richly laden 
with goods that belonged unto the inhabitants of Maracaibo. 
The same slave discovered hkewise the place where the 
Governor of Gibraltar lay hidden, together with the greatest 
part of the women of the town. But all this he revealed, 
through great menaces wherewith they threatened to hang him 
in case he told not what he knew. Captain Morgan sent away 
presently 200 men in two saeties, or great boats, towards the 
river above-mentioned, to seek for what the slave had discovered. 
But he himself, with two-hundred-and-fifty more, undertook 
to go and take the Governor. This gentleman was retired unto 
a small island seated in the middle of the river, where he had 
built a little fort, after the best manner he could, for his defence. 
But hearing that Captain Morgan came in person with great 
forces to seek him, he retired farther off unto the top of a moun- 
tain not much distant from that place ; unto which there was 
no ascent but by a very narrow passage — yea, this was so 
straight that whosoever did pretend to gain the ascent must 



RETURN TO GIBRALTAR 157 

of necessity cause his men to pass one by one. Captain 
Morgan spent two days before he could arrive at the little 
island above-mentioned. Thence he designed to proceed unto 
the mountain where the Governor was posted, had he not been 
told of the impossibility he should find in the ascent, not only 
of the narrowness of the path that led to the top, but also be- 
cause the Governor was very well provided with all sorts of 
ammunition above. Besides that, there was fallen an huge 
rain, whereby all the baggage belonging to the Pirates, and 
their powder, was wet. By this rain also they had lost many of 
their men at the passage over a river that was overflown. 
Here perished likewise some women and children, and many 
mules laden with plate and other goods ; all which they 
had taken in the fields from the fugitive inhabitants. So 
that all things were in a very bad condition with Captain 
Morgan, and the bodies of his men as much harassed, as ought 
to be inferred from this relation. Whereby, if the Spaniards in 
that juncture of time had had but a troop of fifty men well 
armed with pikes or spears, they might have entirely destroyed 
the Pirates, without any possible resistance on their side. But 
the fears which the Spaniards had conceived from the begin- 
ning were so great, that, only hearing the leaves on the trees to 
stir, they often fancied them to be Pirates. Finally, Captain 
Morgan and his people, having upon this march sometimes 
waded up to their middles in water for the space of half or 
whole miles together, they at last escaped for the greatest part. 
But of the women and children they brought home prisoners, 
the major part died. 

Thus twelve days after they set forth to seek the Governor, 
they returned unto Gibraltar with a great number of prisoners. 
Two days after, arrived also the two saeties that went unto the 
river, bringing with them four boats and some prisoners. But, 
as to the greatest part of the merchandize that were in the said 
boats, they found them not, the Spaniards having unladed 
and secured them, as having intelligence beforehand of the 
coming of the Pirates. Whereupon they designed also, when 
the merchandize were all taken out, to bum the boats. Yet 
the Spaniards made not so much haste as was requisite to un- 
lade the said vessels, but that they left both in the ship and 
boats great parcels of goods, which, they being fled from thence, 
the Pirates seized, and brought thereof a considerable booty 



158 RETURN TO MARACAIBO 

unto Gibraltar. Thus, after they had been in possession of 
the place five entire weeks, and committed there infinite number 
of murders, robberies, rapes, and suchlike insolences, they 
concluded upon their departure. But, before this could be 
performed, for the last proof of their t5n:anny they gave orders 
unto some prisoners to go forth into the woods and fields, and 
collect a ransom for the town ; otherwise they would certainly 
burn every house down to the ground. Those poor afflicted 
men went forth as they were sent. And, after they had 
searched every corner of the adjoining fields and woods, they 
returned to Captain Morgan, telling him they had scarce been 
able to find anybody. But that unto such as they had found, 
they had proposed his demands, to which had they made answer 
that the Governor had prohibited them to give any ransom 
for not burning the town. But, notwithstanding any pro- 
hibition to the contrary, they beseeched him to have a little 
patience, and among themselves they would collect to the sum 
of 5000 pieces-of-eight ; and, for the rest, they would give him 
some of their own townsmen as hostages, whom he might 
carry with him to Maracaibo, till such time as he had received 
full satisfaction. 

Captain Morgan, having now been long time absent from 
Maracaibo and knowing the Spaniards had had sufficient time 
wherein to fortify themselves and hinder his departure out of 
the lake, granted them their proposition above-mentioned ; 
and withal made as much haste as he could to set things in 
order for his departure. He gave liberty to all the prisoners, 
having beforehand put them every one to the ransom ; yet 
he detained all the slaves with him. They delivered unto 
him four persons that were agreed upon for hostages of what 
sums of money more he was to receive from them ; and they 
desired to have the slave of whom we made mention above, 
intending to punish him according to his deserts. But 
Captain Morgan would not deliver him, being persuaded they 
would burn him alive. At last they weighed anchor, and set 
sail with all the haste they could, directing their course towards 
Maracaibo. Here they arrived in four days, and found all 
things in the same posture they had left them when they 
departed. Yet here they received news, from the information 
of a poor distressed old man, who was sick and whom alone 
they found in the town, that three Spanish men-of-war were 



SPANISH MEN-OF-WAR 159 

arrived at the entry of the lake, and there waited for the 
return of the Pirates out of those parts. Moreover, that the 
castle at the entry thereof was again put into a good posture 
of defence, being well provided with guns and men and all 
sorts of ammunition. 

This relation of the old man could not choose but cause 
some disturbance in the mind of Captain Morgan, who now 
was careful how to get away through those narrow passages of 
the entry of the lake. Hereupon he sent one of his boats, the 
swiftest he had, to view the entry and see if things were as 
they had been related. The next day the boat came back, 
confirming what was said, and assuring they had viewed the 
ships so nigh that they had been in great danger of the shot 
they made at them. Hereunto they added that the biggest 
ship was mounted with 40 guns, the second with 30, and the 
smallest with four-and-twenty. These forces were much 
beyond those of Captain Morgan ; and hence they caused a 
general consternation in all the Pirates, whose biggest vessel 
had not above 14 small guns. Every one judged Captain 
Morgan to despond in his mind and be destitute of all manner 
of hopes, considering the difficulty either of passing safely with 
his little fleet amidst those great ships and the fort, or that he 
must perish. How to escape any other way by sea or land, 
they saw no opportunity nor convenience. Only they could 
have wished that those three ships had rather come over the 
lake to seek them at Maracaibo than to remain at the mouth 
of the strait where they were. For at that passage they 
must of necessity fear the ruin of their fleet, which consisted 
only for the greatest part of boats. 

Hereupon, being necessitated to act as well as he could, 
Captain Morgan resumed new courage, and resolved to show 
himself as yet undaunted with these terrors. To this intent 
he boldly sent a Spaniard unto the Admiral of those three 
ships, demanding of him a considerable tribute or ransom 
for not putting the city of Maracaibo to the flame. This 
man (who doubtless was received by the Spaniards with 
great admiration of the confidence and boldness of those 
Pirates) returned two days after, bringing unto Captain 
Morgan a letter from the said Admiral, whose contents were 
as follows : — 



i6o LETTER TO MORGAN 

Letter of Don Alonso del Campo y Espinosa, Admiral of the 
Spanish Fleet, unto Captain Morgan, commander of 
the pirates. 

Ha ving understood hy all our friends and neighbours the unex- 
pected news that you have dared to attempt and commit hostilities 
in the countries, cities, towns, and villages belonging unto the 
dominions of his Catholic Majesty, my Sovereign Lord and 
Master, I let you understand by these lines that I am come unto 
this place, according to my obligation, nigh unto tha .astle 
which you took out of the hands of a parcel of cowards ; where 
I have put things into a very good posture of defence, and tnounted 
again the artillery which you had nailed and dismounted. My 
intent is to dispute with you your passage out of the lake, and 
follow and pursue you everywhere, to the end you may see the 
performance of my duty. Notwithstanding, if you be contented 
to surrender with humility all that you have taken, together with 
the slaves and all other prisoners, I will let you freely pass, 
without trouble or molestation ; upon condi' ion that you retire 
home presently unto your own country. But, ' /i case that you make 
any resistance or opposition unto these thr,„gs that I proffer unto 
you, I do assure you I will command boats to come from Caracas, 
wherein I will put my troops, and, coming to Maracaibo, will 
cause you utterly to perish, by putting you every man to the sword. 
This is my last and absolute resolution. Be prudent, therefore, 
and do not abuse my bounty with ingratitude. I have with me 
very good soldiers, who desire nothing more ardently than to 
revenge on you and your people all the cruelties and base infamous 
actions you have committed upon the Spanish nation in America. 
Dated on board the Royal Ship named the Magdalen, lying at 
anchor at the entry of the Lake of Maracaibo, this 24th day of 
April, 1669. 

Don Alonso del Campo y Espinosa 

As soon as Captain Morgan had received this letter, he called 
all his men together in the market-place of Maracaibo ; and, 
after reading the contents thereof, both in French and English, 
he asked their advice and resolutions upon the whole matter, 
and whether they had rather surrender all they had purchased, 
to obtain their liberty, than fight for it. 

They answered all unanimously^ : They had rather fight, and 
spill the very last drop of blood they had in their veins, than 
surrender so easily the booty they had gotten with so much danger 
of their lives. Among the rest, one was found who said unto 



MORGAN'S REPLY i6t 

Captain Morgan : Take you care for the rest, and I will under- 
take to destroy the biggest of those ships with only twelve men. 
The manner shall be by making a brulot, or fire-ship, of that 
vessel we took in the river of Gibraltar — which, to the intent she 
may not be known for a fire-ship, we will fill her decks with logs 
of wood, standing with hats and montera caps^, to deceive their 
sight with the representation of men. The same we will do at the 
port-holes that serve for guns, which shall be filled with counter- 
feit cannon. At the stern we will hang out the English colours, 
and persuade the enemy she is one of our best men-of-war that 
goes to fight them. This proposition, being heard by the Junta^, 
was admitted and approved of by every one, howbeit their 
fears were not quite dispersed. 

For, notwithstanding what had been concluded there, they 
endeavoured the next day to see if they could come to an 
accommodation with Don Alonso. Unto this effect Captain 
Morgan sent him two persons, with these following proposi- 
tions. First : That he would quit Maracaibo, without doing 
any damage to the town, nor exacting any ransom for the firing 
thereof. Secondly : That he would set at liberty one half of 
the slaves, and likewise all other prisoners, without ransom. 
Thirdly : That he would send home freely the four chief inhabi- 
tants of Gibraltar which he had in his custody as hostages for the 
contributions those people had promised to pay. These propo- 
sitions from the Pirates, being understood by Don Alonso, 
were instantly rejected by every one, as being dishonourable 
for him to grant. Neither would he hear any word more of 
any other accommodation, but sent back this message : That 
in case they surrendered 7iot themselves voluntarily into his hands 
within the space of two days, under the conditions which he had 
offered them by his letter, he would immediately come and force 
them to do it. 

No sooner had Captain Morgan received this message from 
Don Alonso than he put all things in order to fight, resolving 
to get out of the lake by main force, and without surrendering 
anything. In the first place, he commanded all the slaves and 

* Montera, a Spanish hunting-cap : cf. Hawkins, Voyage to the South 
Seas [i 593-1 622]. § xiii : "... upon their heads they weare a night- 
capp, upon it a montero, and a hat over that." 

« Junta, Spanish, a meeting, council : cf. Howell, Letters [1622], iii, 
X : " a particular Junta of some of the Counsell of State and War might 
be appointed to determine the businesse." 



1 62 PIRATES RESOLVE TO FIGHT 

prisoners to be tied and guarded very well. After this, they 
gathered all the pitch, tar, and brimstone they could find in 
the whole town, wherewith to prepare the fire-ship above- 
mentioned. Likewise they made several inventions of powder 
and brimstone, with great quantities of. palm-leaves, very well 
ointed with tar. They covered very well their counterfeit 
cannon, laying under every piece thereof many pounds of 
powder. Besides which, they cut down many outworks 
belonging to the ship, to the end the powder might exert its 
strength the better. Thus they broke open also new port- 
holes, where, instead of guns they placed little drums, of which 
the negroes make use. Finally, the decks were handsomely 
beset with many pieces of wood dressed up in the shape of 
men with hats, as monteras, and likewise armed with swords, 
muskets, and bandoliers. 

The hrulot, or fire-ship, being thus fitted to their purpose, 
they prepared themselves to go to the entry of the port. 
All the prisoners were put into one great boat, and in another 
of the biggest they placed all the women, plate, jewels, and 
other rich things which they had. Into others, they put all the 
bales of goods and merchandize, and other things of greatest 
bulk. Each of these boats had twelve men on board, very 
well armed. The hrulot had orders to go before the rest of the 
vessels, and presently to fall foul with the great ship. All 
things being in readiness. Captain Morgan exacted an oath 
of all his comrades, whereby they protested to defend them- 
selves against the Spaniards even to the last drop of blood, 
without demanding quarter at any rate : promising them 
withal that whosoever thus behaved himself should be very 
well rewarded. 

With this disposition of mind and courageous resolution, 
they set sail to seek the Spaniards on the 30th day of April, 
1669. They found the Spanish fleet riding at anchor in the 
middle of the entry of the lake. Captain Morgan, it being 
now late and almost dark, commanded all his vessels to come 
to an anchor, with design to fight thence even all night, if 
they should provoke him thereunto. He gave orders that a 
careful and vigilant watch should be kept on board every vessel 
till the morning, they being almost within shot, as well as 
within fight, of the enemy. The dawning of the day being 
come, they weighed anchors, and set sail again, steering their 



ATTEMPT TO TAKE THE CASTLE 165 

course directly towards the Spaniards, who, observing them 
to move, did instantly the same. The fire-ship, sailing before 
the rest, fell presently upon the great ship, and grappled 
to her sides in a short while. Which, by the Spaniards being 
perceived to be a fire-ship, they attempted to escape the danger 
by putting her off ; but in vain, and too late. For the flame 
suddenly seized her timber and tackling, and in a short space 
consumed all the stern, the forepart sinking into the sea, 
whereby she perished. The second Spanish ship, perceiving 
the Admiral to burn, not by accident but by industry of the 
enemy, escaped towards the castle, where the Spaniards them- 
selves caused her to sink, choosing this way of losing their 
ship, rather than to fall into the hands of those Pirates, which 
they held for inevitable. The third, as having no oppor- 
tunity nor time to escape, was taken by the Pirates. The sea- 
men that sank the second ship nigh unto the castle, perceiving 
the Pirates to come towards them to take what remains they 
could find of their ship-wreck (for some part of the bulk was 
extant above water), set fire in like manner unto this vessel, 
to the end the Pirates might enjoy nothing of that spoil. The 
first ship being set on fire, some of the persons that were in her 
swam towards the shore. These the Pirates would have taken 
up in their boats, but they would neither ask nor admit of any 
quarter, choosing rather to lose their lives than receive them 
from the hands of' their persecutors, for such reasons as I shall 
relate hereafter. 

The Pirates were extremely gladded at this signal victory, 
obtained in so short a time and with so great inequality of 
forces ; whereby they conceived greater pride in their minds 
than they had before. Hereupon they all presently ran ashore, 
intending to take the castle. This they found very well pro- 
vided both with men, great cannon, and ammunition — they 
having no other arms than muskets and a few fire-balls in 
their hands. Their own artillery they thought incapable, for 
its smallness, of making any considerable breach in the walls. 
Thus they spent the rest of that day firing at the garrison with 
their muskets till the dusk of the evening, at which time they 
attempted to advance nigh unto the walls, with intent to throw 
in the fire-balls. But the Spaniards, resolving to sell their 
lives as dear as they could, continued firing so furiously at 
them that they thought it not convenient to approach any 



1 66 THE SPANISH PILOT'S DEPOSITION 

nearer nor persist any longer in that dispute. Thus, having 
experienced the obstinacy of the enemy, and seeing thirty of 
their own men already dead and as many more wounded, they 
retired unto their ships. 

The Spaniards, believing the Pirates would return the next 
day to renew the attack, as also make use of their own cannon 
against the castle, laboured very hard all night to put things 
in order for their coming. But more particularly they em- 
ployed themselves that night in digging down and making 
plain some little hills and eminent places whence possibly the 
castle might be offended. 

But Captain Morgan intended not to come ashore again, 
busying himself the next day in taking prisoners some of the 
men who still swam alive upon the waters, and hoping to get 
part of the riches that were lost in the two ships that perished. 
Among the rest he took a certain pilot, who was a stranger and 
who belonged to the lesser ship of the two, with whom he held 
much discourse, inquiring of him several things. Such ques- 
tions were : What number of people those three ships had had in 
them ? Whether they expected any more ships to come ? From 
what port they set forth the last time, when they came to seek them 
out ? His answer unto all these questions was as follows, 
which he delivered in the Spanish tongue : 

Noble Sir, be pleased to pardon and spare me, that no evil 
be done unto me, as being a stranger unto this nation I have 
served, and shall sincerely inform you of all [thaf] passed till our 
arrival at this lake. We were sent by orders from the Supreme 
Council of State in Spain, being 6 men-of-war well equipped 
into these seas, with instructions to cruize upon the English 
pirates, and root them out from these parts by destroying as many 
of them as we could. These orders were given by reason of the 
news brought unto the Court of Spain of the loss and ruin of 
Porto Bello and other places. Of all which damages and hos- 
tilities committed here by the English very dismal lamentations 
have oftentimes penetrated the ears of both the Catholic King and 
Council, unto whom belongs the care and preservation of this 
New World. And, although the Spanish Court has many 
times by their ambassadors sent complaints hereof unto the 
King of England, yet it has been the constant answer of his 
Majesty of Great Britain : That he never gave any letters- 
patent nor commissions for the acting any hostility whatsoever 
against the subjects of the King of Spain. Hereupon the Catholic 



THE SPANISH PILOT'S DEPOSITION 167 

King, being resolved to revenge his subjects and punish these 
proceedings, commanded six men-of-war to be equipped, which 
he sent into these parts under the command of Don Augustin 
de Bustos, who was constituted A dmiral of the said fleet. He 
commmanded the biggest ship thereof, named Na Sa^ de la Soledad, 
mounted with eight-and-forty great guns and eight small ones. 
The Vice-Admiral was Don Alonso del Campo y Espinosa, who 
commanded the second ship, called La Concepcion, which carried 
forty-four great guns and eight small ones. Besides which 
vessels, there were also four more, whereof the first was named 
the Magdalen, and was mounted with 36 great guns and 12 small 
ones, having on board 250 men. The second was called St Lewis, 
with 26 great guns, 12 small ones and 200 men. The third was 
called La Marquesa, which carried 16 great guns, 8 small ones 
and 150 men. The fourth and last, Na Sa^ del Carmen, with 18 
great guns, 8 small ones, and likewise 150 men. 

We were now arrived at Cartagena, when the two greatest ships 
received orders to return into Spain, as being judged too big for 
cruizing upon these coasts. With the four ships remaining, 
Don Alonso del Campo y Espinosa departed thence towards 
Campeche, to seek out the English. We arrived at the port of 
the said city, where, being surprised by a huge storm that blew 
from the north we lost one of our four ships, being that which I 
named in the last place among the rest. Hence we set sail for 
the isle of Hispaniola, in sight of which we came within few days, 
and directed our course unto the port of San Domingo. Here 
we received intelligence there had passed timt way a fleet from 
Jamaica, and that some men thereof having landed at a place 
called Alta Gracia, the inhabitants had taken one of them prisoner , 
who confessed their whole design was to go and pillage the city 
of Caracas. With these news Don Alonso instantly weighed 
anchor, and set sail thence, crossing over unto the continent, till 
we came in sight of Caracas. Here we found not the English, 
but happened to meet with a boat which certified us they were in 
the Lake of Maracaibo, and that the fleet consisted of 7 sm^ll 
ships and one boat. 

Upon this intelligence we arrived here ; and, coming nigh 
unto the entry of the lake, we shot off a gun to demand a pilot from 
the shore. Those on land, perceiving that we were Spaniards, 
came willingly to us with a pilot, and told us that the English 
had taken the city of Maracaibo, and that they were at present 
at the pillage of Gibraltar. Don Alonso, having understood this 
news, made a handsome speech to all his soldiers and mariners, 
encouraging them to perform their duty, and withal promising 

* Nuestra Sefiora, Our Lady. 



1 68 RANSOM AGAIN DEMANDED 

to divide among them all they should take from the English. 
After this, he gave order that the guns which we had taken out 
of the ship that was lost should he put into the castle, and there 
mounted for its defence, with 2 pieces more out of his own ship, 
of i8 pounds port each. The pilots conducted us into the port, 
and Don Alonso commanded the people that were on shore to come 
unto his presence, unto whom he gave orders to repossess the 
castle, and reinforce it with loo men more than it had before its 
being taken by the English. Not long after, we received news 
that you were returned from Gibraltar unto Maracaibo, unto 
which place Don Alonso wrote you a letter, giving you account 
of his arrival and design, and withal exhorting you to restore 
all that you had taken. This you refused to do ; whereupon he 
renewed his promises and intentions to his soldiers and seamen. 
And, having given a very good supper unto all his people, he 
persuaded them neither to take nor give any quarter unto the 
English that should fall into their hands. This was the occasion 
of so many being drowned, who dared not to crave any quarter 
for their lives, as knowing their own intentions of giving none. 
Two days before you came against us, a certain negro came on 
hoard Don Alonso' s ship, telling him : Sir, be pleased to have 
great care of yourself , for the English have prepared a fire-ship 
with desire to burn your fleet. But Don Alonso would not believe 
this intelligence, his answer being : How can that he ? Have 
they, peradventure, wit enough to build a fireship ? or what 
instruments have they [to] do it withal ? 

The pilot above-mentioned, having related so distinctly all 
the aforesaid things unto Captain Morgan, was very well used 
by him, and, after some kind proffers made unto him, remained 
in his service. He discovered, moreover, unto Captain Morgan, 
that in the ship which was sunk there was a great quantity of 
plate, even to the value of 40,000 pieces-of-eight ; and that 
this was certainly the occasion they had oftentimes seen the 
Spaniards in boats about the said ship. Hereupon Captain 
Morgan ordered that one of his ships should remain there to 
watch all occasions of getting out of the said vessel what plate 
they could. In the meanwhile he himself, with all his fleet, 
returned unto Maracaibo, where he refitted the great ship he 
had taken of the three afore-mentioned. And, now being well 
accommodated, he chose it for himself, giving his own bottom 
to one of his Captains. 

After this he sent again a messenger unto the Admiral, who 



THE RANSOM IS PAID 169 

was escaped on shore and got into the castle, demanding of him 
a tribute or ransom of fire for the town of Maracaibo ; which 
being denied, he threatened he would entirely consume and 
destroy it. The Spaniards, considering how unfortunate they 
had been all along with those Pirates, and not knowing after 
what manner to get rid of them, concluded among themselves 
to pay the said ransom, although Don Alonso would not consent 
unto it. 

Hereupon they sent unto Captain Morgan to ask what sum 
he demanded. He answered them he would have 30,000 
pieces-of -eight, and 500 beeves, to the intent his fleet might be 
well victualled with flesh . This ransom being paid, he promised 
in such case he would give no farther trouble unto the prisoners, 
nor cause any ruin or damage unto the town. Finally they 
agreed with him upon the sum of 20,000 pieces-of-eight, 
besides the 500 beeves. The cattle the Spaniards brought in 
the next day, together with one part of the money. And, 
while the pirates were busied in salting the flesh, they returned 
with the rest of the whole sum of 20,000 pieces-of-eight, for 
which they had agreed. 

But Captain Morgan would not deliver for that present the 
prisoners, as he had promised to do, by reason he feared the 
shot of the artillery of the castle at his going forth of the lake. 
Hereupon he told them he intended not to deliver them till 
such time as he was out of that danger, hoping by this means 
to obtain a free passage. Thus he set sail with all his fleet 
in quest of that ship which he had left behind, to seek for the 
plate of the vessel that was burnt. He found her upon the 
place, with the sum of 15,000 pieces-of-eight, which they had 
purchased out of the wreck, besides many other pieces of plate, 
as hilts of swords and other things of this kind ; also great 
quantity of pieces-of-eight that were melted and run together 
by the force of the fire of the said ship. 

Captain Morgan scarce thought himself secure, neither could 
he contrive how to evade the damages the said castle might 
cause unto his fleet. Hereupon he told the prisoners it was 
necessary they should agree with the Governor to open the 
passage with security for his fleet ; unto which point, if he 
should not consent, he would certainly hang them all up in his 
ships. After this warning the prisoners met together to confer 
upon the persons they should depute unto the said Governor 



I70 DEPUTATION TO THE GOVERNOR 

Don Alonso ; and they assigned some few among them for that 
embassy. These went unto him, beseeching and supplicating 
the Admiral he would have compassion and pity on those 
afflicted prisoners who were as yet, together with their wives 
and children, in the hands of Captain Morgan, and that unto this 
effect he would be pleased to give his word to let the whole fleet 
of Pirates freely pass, without any molestation, forasmuch as 
this would be the only remedy of saving both the lives of them 
that came with this petition as also of those who remained 
behind in captivity — all being equally menaced with the sword 
and gallows, in case he granted not this humble request. But 
Don Alonso gave them for answer a sharp reprehension of their 
cowardice, telling them : // you had been as loyal unto your 
King in hindering the entry of these Pirates as I shall do their 
going out, you had never caused these troubles, neither unto 
yourselves nor unto our whole nation, which have suffered so much 
through your pusillanimity. In a word, I shall never grant your 
request, but shall endeavour to maintain that respect which is due 
unto my King, according to my duty. 

Thus the Spaniards returned to their fellow-prisoners with 
much consternation of mind and no hopes of obtaining their 
requests, telling unto Captain Morgan what answer they had 
received. His reply was : If Don Alonso will not let me pass, 
I will find means how to do it without him. Hereupon he began 
presently to make a dividend of all the booty they had taken 
in that voyage, fearing lest he might not have an opportunity 
of doing it in another place, if any tempest should arise and 
separate the ships, as also being jealous that any of the Com- 
manders might run away with the best part of the spoil which 
then did lie much more in one vessel than another. Thus they 
all brought in, according to their laws, and declared what they 
had ; having beforehand made an oath not to conceal the least 
thing from the public. The accounts being cast up, they found 
to the value of 250,000 pieces-of-eight in money and jewels, 
besides the huge quantity of merchandize and slaves : all 
which purchase was divided into every ship or boat, according 
to its share. 

The dividend being made, the question still remained on foot 
how they should pass the castle and get out of the lake. Unto 
this effect they made use of a stratagem, of no ill invention, 
which was as follows. On the day that preceded the night 



MORGAN'S STRATAGEM 171 

wherein they determined to get forth, they embarked many of 
their men in canoes, and rowed towards the shore, as if they 
designed to land them. Here they concealed themselves under 
the branches of trees that hang over the coast for a while till 
they had laid themselves down along in the boats. Then the 
canoes returned unto the ships, with the appearance only of two 
or three men rowing them back, all the rest being concealed at 
the bottom of the canoes. Thus much only could be perceived 
from the castle ; and this action of false landing of men, for so 
we may call it, was repeated that day several times. Hereby 
the Spaniards were brought into persuasion the Pirates in- 
tended to force the castle by scaling it, as soon as night should 
come. This fear caused them to place most of their great guns 
on that side which looks towards the land, together with the 
main force of their arms, leaving the contrary side belonging 
to the sea almost destitute of strength and defence. 

Night being come, they weighed anchor, and by the light of 
the moon, without setting sail, committed themselves to the 
ebbing tide, which gently brought them down the river, till 
they were nigh unto the castle. Being now almost over against 
it, they spread their sails with all the haste they could possibly 
make. The Spaniards, perceiving them to escape, transported 
with all speed their guns from the other side of the castle, and 
began to fire very furiously at the Pirates. But these, having 
a favourable wind, were almost past the danger before those of 
the castle could put things into convenient order of offence. 
So that the Pirates lost not many of their men, nor received 
any considerable damage in their ships. Being now out of 
the reach of the guns. Captain Morgan sent a canoe unto the 
castle with some of the prisoners ; and the Governor thereof 
gave them a boat that every one might return to his own home. 
Notwithstanding, he detained the hostages he had from 
Gibraltar, by reason those of that town were not as yet come to 
pay the rest of the ransom for not firing the place. Just as he 
departed. Captain Morgan ordered seven great guns with 
bullets to be fired against the castle, as it were to take his leave 
of them. But they answered not so much as with a musket- 
shot. 

The next day after their departure, they were surprised with 
a great tempest, which forced them to cast anchor in the depth 
of 5 or 6 fathom water. But the storm increased so much that 



172 ATTEMPT ON COMANA 

they were compelled to weigh again and put out to sea, where 
they were in great danger of being lost. For if on either side 
they should have been cast on shore, either to fall into the 
hands of the Spaniards or of the Indians, they would certainly 
have obtained no mercy. At last the tempest being spent, 
the wind ceased, which caused much content and joy in the 
whole fleet. 

While Captain Morgan made his fortune by pillaging the 
towns above-mentioned, the rest of his companions, who 
separated from his fleet at the Cape de Lobos for to take the 
ship of which was spoken before, endured much misery, and 
were very unfortunate in all their attempts. For, being 
arrived at the isle of Savona, they found not Captain Morgan 
there, nor any of their companions. Neither had they the 
good fortune to find a letter which Captain Morgan at his 
departure left behind him in a certain place where in all prob- 
abiHty they would meet with it. Thus, not knowing what course 
to steer, they at last concluded to pillage some town or other, 
whereby to seek their fortune. They were in all 400 men, more 
or less, who were divided into ships and one boat. Being ready 
to set forth, they constituted an Admiral among themselves, 
by whom they might be directed in the whole affair. 
Unto this effect they chose a certain person who had be- 
haved himself very courageously at the taking of Porto Bello, 
and whose name was Captain Hansel. This Commander 
resolved to attempt the taking of the town of Comana, seated 
nigh upon the continent of Caracas, nigh threescore leagues 
from the West side of the isle of Trinidad. Being arrived 
there, they landed their men, and killed some few Indians 
that were near the coast. But approaching unto the town, 
the Spaniards, having in their company many Indians, dis- 
puted them the entry so briskly that with great loss and in 
great confusion they were forced to retire towards their ships. 
At last they arrived at Jamaica, where the rest of their 
companions who came with Captain Morgan ceased not to 
mock and jeer them for their ill success at Comana, often 
telling them : Let us see what money you brought from Comana, 
and if it he as good silver as that which we bring from Maracaibo. 

The end of the Second Part 



PART III 



CHAPTER I 



Captain Morgan goes to the isle of Hispaniola to equip a new fleet, 
with intent to pillage again upon the coasts of the West 
Indies 

Captain Morgan perceived now that fortune favoured his 
arms by giving good success to all his enterprizes, which 
occasioned him, as it is usual in human affairs, to aspire to 
greater things, trusting she would always be constant unto 
him. Such was the burning of Panama, wherein fortune 
failed not to assist him, in like manner as she had done before, 
crowning the event of his actions with victory, howbeit she had 
led him thereunto through thousands of difficulties. The 
history hereof I shall now begin to relate, as being so much 
remarkable in all its circumstances as peradventure nothing 
more deserving memory may occur to be read by future ages. 

Not long after Captain Morgan arrived at Jamaica, he 
found many of his chief officers and soldiers reduced to their 
former state of indigence through their immoderate vices 
and debauchery. Hence they ceased not to importune him 
for new invasions and exploits, thereby to get something to 
expend anew in wine and strumpets, as they had already 
wasted what was purchased so little before. Captain Morgan, 
being willing to follow fortune while she called him, hereupon 
stopped the mouths of many of the inhabitants of Jamaica, 
who were creditors to his men for large sums of money, with 
the hopes and promises he gave them of greater achievements 
than ever by a new expedition he was going about. This 
being done, he needed not give himself much trouble to levy 
men for this or any other enterprize, his name being now so 

173 



174 MORGAN EQUIPS A NEW FLEET 

famous through all those islands as that alone would readily 
bring him in more men than he could well employ. He under- 
took, therefore, to equip a new fleet of ships ; for which purpose 
he assigned the South side of the isle of Tortuga as a place of 
rendezvous. With this resolution, he wrote divers letters 
to all the ancient and expert Pirates there inhabiting, as also 
to the Governor of the said isle, and to the planters and hunters 
of Hispaniola, giving them to understand his intentions, and 
desiring their appearance at the said place, in case they intended 
to go with him. All these people had no sooner understood 
his designs but they flocked unto the place assigned in huge 
numbers, with ships, canoes, and boats, being desirous to obey 
his commands. Many who had not the convenience of coming 
unto him by sea traversed the woods of Hispaniola, and with 
no small difficulties arrived there by land. Thus all were 
present at the place assigned, and in readiness, against the 24th 
day of October, 1670. 

Captain Morgan was not wanting to be there according to 
his punctual custom, who came in his ship unto the same side 
of the island, to a port called by the French Port Couillon, 
over against the island De la Vaca, this being the place which 
he had assigned unto others. Having now gathered the 
greatest part of his fleet, he called a council, to deliberate about 
the means of finding provisions sufficient for so many people. 
Here they concluded to send four ships and one boat, manned 
with 400 men, over to the continent, to the intent they should 
rifle some country-towns and villages, and in these get all the 
corn or maize they could gather. They set sail for the con- 
tinent, towards the river De la Hacha, with design to assault 
a small village called La Rancheria, where is usually to be 
found the greatest quantity of maize of all those parts there- 
abouts. In the meanwhile Captain Morgan sent another 
party of his men to hunt in the woods, who killed there an 
huge number of beasts, and salted them. The rest of his 
companions remained in the ships, to clean, fit, and rig them 
out to sea, so, at the return of those who were sent abroad, 
all things might be in readiness to weigh anchor and follow 
the course of their designs. 



CHAPTER II 

What happened in the river De la Hacha 

The four ships above-mentioned, after they had set sail from 
Hispaniola, steered their course till they came within sight of 
the river De la Hacha, where they were suddenly overtaken 
with a tedious calm. Being thus within sight of land becalmed 
for some days, the Spaniards inhabiting along the coasts, who 
had perceived them to be enemies, had sufficient time to pre- 
pare themselves for the assault, at least to hide the best part of 
their goods, to the end that, without any care of preserving 
them, they might be in readiness to retire when they found 
themselves unable to resist the force of the Pirates, by 
whose frequent attempts upon those coasts they had 
already learnt what they had to do in such cases. 
There was in the river at that present a good ship, which 
was come from Cartagena to lade maize, and was now when 
the Pirates came almost ready to depart. The men 
belonging to this ship endeavoured to escape, but, not 
being able to do it, both they and the vessel fell into their 
hands. This was a fit purchase for their mind, as being good 
part of what they came to seek for with so much care and toil. 
The next morning about break of day they came with their 
ships towards the shore, and landed their men, although the 
Spaniards made huge resistance from a battery which they 
had raised on that side where of necessity they were to land ; 
but, notwithstanding what defence they could make, they were 
forced to retire towards a village, unto which the Pirates 
followed them. Here the Spaniards, rallying again, fell upon 
them with great fury, and maintained a strong combat, which 
lasted till night was come ; but then, perceiving they had lost 
great number of men, which was no smaller on the Pirates' 
side, they retired unto places more occult in the woods. 

'7S 



176 IN THE RIVER DE LA HACHA 

The next day when the Pirates saw they were all fled, and 
the town left totally empty of people, they pursued them as 
far as they could possibly. In this pursuit they overtook a 
party of Spaniards, whom they made all prisoners and exer- 
cised the most cruel torments, to discover where they had 
hidden their goods : some were found who by the force of 
intolerable tortures confessed, but others who would not do the 
same were used more barbarously than the former. Thus, in 
the space of fifteen days that they remained there, they took 
many prisoners, much plate and movable goods, with all 
other things they could rob, with which booty they resolved 
to return unto Hispaniola. Yet, not contented with what 
they had already got, they dispatched some prisoners into the 
woods to seek for the rest of the inhabitants, and to demand 
of them a ransom for not burning the town. Unto this they 
answered, they had no money nor plate ; but, in case they 
would be satisfied with a certain quantity of maize, they 
would give as much as they could afford. The Pirates accepted 
this proffer, as being more useful to them at that occasion than 
ready money, and agreed they should pay 4000 hanegs^ 
(or bushels) of maize. These were brought in three days after, 
the Spaniards being desirous to rid themselves as soon as 
possible of that inhuman sort of people. Having laded them 
on board their ships, together with all the rest of their pur- 
chase, they returned unto the island of Hispaniola, to give 
account unto their leader. Captain Morgan, of all they had 
performed. 

They had now been absent five entire weeks, about the 
commission aforementioned, which long delay occasioned 
Captain Morgan almost to despair of their return, as fearing 
lest they were fallen into the hands of the Spaniards, especially 
considering that the place whereunto they went could easily 
be relieved from Cartagena and Santa Maria, if the inhabitants 
were anything careful to alarm the country : on the other side 
he feared lest they should have made some great fortune in 
that voyage, and with it escaped to some other place. But at 
last seeing his ships return, and in greater number than they 
had departed, he resumed new courage, this sight causing 
both him and his companions infinite joy. This was much 

^ hanega, Portug. fanega, a dry measure of capacity, about a 
bushel to a bushel and a half English. 



FIGHTING STRENGTH OF THE FLEET 177 

increased when, being arrived, they found them full laden 
with maize, whereof they stood in great need for the main- 
tenance of so many people, by whose help they expected great 
matters through the conduct of their Commander. 

After Captain Morgan had divided the said maize, as also 
the flesh which the hunters brought in, among all the ships 
according to the number of men that were in every vessel, 
he concluded upon the departure, having viewed beforehand 
every ship, and observed their being well equipped and clean. 
Thus he set sail, and directed his course towards Cape Tiburon, 
where he determined to take his measures and resolution of 
what enterprize he should take in hand. No sooner were they 
arrived there but they met with some other ships that came 
newly to join them from Jamaica. So that now the whole 
fleet consisted of 37 ships, wherein were 2000 fighting men, 
besides mariners and boys ; the Admiral hereof was mounted 
with 22 great guns and 6 small ones, of brass ; the rest carried 
some 20, some 16, some 18, and the smallest vessel at least 4, 
besides which they had great quantity of ammunition and 
fire balls, with other inventions of powder. 

Captain Morgan finding himself with such a great number of 
ships, divided the whole fleet into two squadrons, constituting 
a Vice-Admiral, and other officers and Commanders of the 
second squadron, distinct from the former. Unto every one 
of these he gave letters patent, or commissions, to act all 
manner of hostility against the Spanish nation, and take of 
them what ships they could, either abroad at sea or in the 
harbours, in like manner as if they were open and declared 
enemies (as he termed it) of the King of England, his pretended 
master. This being done, he called all his Captains and 
other officers together, and caused them to sign some articles 
of common agreement betwixt them, and in the name of all. 
Herein it was stipulated that he should have the hundredth 
part of all that was gotten to himself alone : That every 
captain should draw the shares of eight men, for the expenses 
of his ship, besides his own : That the surgeon, besides his 
ordinary pay, should have 200 pieces-of-eight, for his chest 
of medicaments : And every carpenter, above his common 
salary, should draw 100 pieces-of-eight. As to recompenses 
and rewards, they were regulated in this voyage much higher 
than was expressed in the First Part of this book. Thus, for 



1 78 DECISION TO ATTACK PANAMA 

the loss of both legs, they assigned 1500 pieces-of-eight or 15 
slaves, the choice being left to the election of the party ; for 
the loss of both hands, 1800 pieces-of-eight or 18 slaves ; for one 
leg, whether the right or the left, 600 pieces-of-eight or 6 slaves ; 
for a hand, as much as for a leg ; and for the loss of an eye, 100 
pieces-of-eight or i slave. Lastly, unto him that in any battle 
should signalize himself , either by entering the first any castle, or 
taking down the Spanish colours and setting up the English, 
they constituted 50 pieces-of-eight for a reward. In the head 
of these articles it was stipulated that all these extraordinary 
salaries, recompenses, and rewards should be paid out of the 
first spoil or purchase they should take, according as every 
one should then occur to be either rewarded or paid. 

This contract being signed, Captain Morgan commanded his 
Vice-Admirals and Captains to put all things in order, every 
one in his ship, for to go and attempt one of three places, either 
Cartagena, Panama, or Vera Cruz ; but the lot fell upon 
Panama as being believed to be the richest of all three : not- 
withstanding this city being situated at such distance from 
the Northern sea, as they knew not well the avenues and entries 
necessary to approach unto it, they judged it necessary to go 
beforehand to the isle of St Catharine, there to find and pro- 
vide themselves with some persons who might serve them for 
guides in this enterprize ; for in the garrison of that island are 
commonly employed many banditti and outlaws belonging to 
Panama and the neighbouring places, who are very expert in 
the knowledge of all that country. But, before they pro- 
ceeded any farther, they caused an act to be published through 
the whole fleet, containing that, in case they met with any 
Spanish vessel, the first Captain who with his men should 
enter and take the said ship should have for his reward the 
tenth part of whatsoever should be found within her. 



CHAPTER III 

Captain Morgan leaves the island of Hispaniola, and goes to that 
of St Catharine, which he takes 

Captain Morgan and his companions weighed anchor from 
the Cape of Tiburon, the i6th day of December in the year 1670. 
Four days after they arrived within sight of the isle of St 
Catharine, which was now in possession of the Spaniards again, 
as was said in the Second Part of this history, and unto which 
they commonl banish all the malefactors of the Spanish 
dominions in the West Indies. In this island are found huge 
quantities of pigeons at certain seasons of the year ; it is 
watered continually by four rivulets or brooks, whereof two 
are always dry in the summer season. Here is no manner of 
trade nor commerce exercised by the inhabitants, neither do 
they give themselves the trouble to plant more fruits than 
what are necessary for the sustentation of human life ; how- 
beit the country would be sufficient to make very good plan- 
tations of tobacco, which might render considerable profit, 
were it cultivated for that use. 

As soon as Captain Morgan came nigh unto the island with 
his fleet, he sent before one of his best sailing vessels to view 
the entry of the river and see if any other ships were there who 
might hinder him from landing ; as also fearing lest they should 
give intelligence of his arrival to the inhabitants of the island, 
and they by this means prevent his designs. 

The next day before sunrise, all the fleet came to anchor 
nigh unto the island, in a certain bay called Aguada Grande : 
upon this bay the Spaniards had lately built a battery, mounted 
with four pieces of cannon. Captain Morgan landed with 
1000 men, more or less, and disposed them into squadrons, 
beginning his march through the woods, although they had no 
other guides than some few of his own men who had been there 

179 



i8o GREAT HARDSHIPS ENDURED 

before when Mansvelt took and ransacked the island. The 
same day they came unto a certain place where the Governor 
at other times did keep his ordinary residence : here they 
found a battery called The Platform, but nobody in it, the 
Spaniards having retired unto the lesser island, which, as was 
said before, is so nigh' unto the great one that a short bridge 
only may conjoin them. 

This lesser island aforesaid was so well fortified with forts 
and batteries round about it as might seem impregnable. 
Hereupon, as soon as the Spaniards perceived the pirates to 
approach, they began to fire upon them so furiously that they 
could advance nothing that day, but were contented to retreat 
a little, and take up their rest upon the grass in the open fields, 
which afforded no strange beds to these people, as being suffi- 
ciently used to such kind of repose : what most afflicted them 
was hunger, having not eaten the least thing that whole day. 
About midnight it began to rain so hard that those miserable 
people had much ado to resist so much hardship, the greatest 
part of them having no other clothes than a pair of seaman's 
trousers or breeches and a shirt, without either shoes or 
stockings. Thus finding themselves in great extremity, they 
began to pull down a few thatched houses to make fires 
withal : in a word, they were in such condition that one hundred 
men, indifferently well armed, might easily that night have 
torn them all in pieces. The next morning about break of day 
the rain ceased, at which time they began to dry their arms, 
which were entirely wet, and proceed on their march. But 
not long after, the rain recommenced anew, rather harder than 
before, as if the skies were melted into waters, which caused 
them to cease from advancing towards the forts, whence the 
Spaniards did continually fire at the Pirates, seeing them to 
approach. 

The Pirates were now reduced unto great affliction and 
danger of their lives through the hardness of the weather, 
their own nakedness, and the great hunger they sustained. 
For a small relief hereof, they happened to find in the fields an 
old horse, which was both lean and full of scabs and blotches, 
with galled back and sides. This horrid animal they instantly 
killed and flayed, and divided into small pieces among them- 
selves as far as it would reach, for man}^ could not obtain one 
morsel, which they roasted and devoured without either salt or 



GOVERNOR BETRAYS THE ISLAND i8i 

bread, more like unto ravenous wolves than men. The rain as 
yet ceased not to fall, and Captain Morgan perceivedtheir minds 
to relent, hearing many of them say they would return on 
board the ships. Amongst these fatigues both of mind and 
body, he thought it convenient to use some sudden and 
almost unexpected remedy : unto this effect he commanded a 
canoe to be rigged in all haste, and colours of truce to be hanged 
out of it. This canoe he sent to the Spanish Governor of the 
island with this message : That if within a few hours he 
delivered not himself and all his men into his hands, he did by 
that messenger swear unto him and all those that were in his 
company, he would most certainly put them all to the sword, 
without granting quarter to any. 

After noon the canoe returned with this answer : That the 
Governor desired two hours' time to deliberate with his officers in 
a full council about that affair ; which being past, he would give 
his positive answer to the message. The time now being elapsed 
the said Governor sent two canoes with white colours, and two 
persons, to treat with Captain Morgan ; but before they landed, 
they demanded of the Pirates two persons as hostages of their 
security. These were readily granted by Captain Morgan, 
who delivered unto them two of his Captains, for a mutual 
pledge of the security required. With this the Spaniards 
propounded unto Captain Morgan that their Governor in a 
full assembly had resolved to deliver up the island, as not being 
provided with sufficient forces to defend it against such an 
armada or fleet. But withal he desired that Captain Morgan 
would be pleased to use a certain stratagem of war, for the better 
saving of his own credit and the reputation of his officers both 
abroad and at home, which should be as follows : That 
Captain Morgan would come with his troops by night, nigh unto 
the bridge that joined the lesser island unto the great one, and there 
attack the fort of St Jerome : that at the same time all the ships 
of his fleet would draw nigh unto the castle of Santa Teresa, and 
attack it by sea, landing in the meanwhile some more troops 
near the battery called St Matthew : that these troops which were 
newly landed should by this means intercept the Governor by the 
way, as he endeavoured to pass unto St J erome' s fort , and then 
take him prisoner, using the formality, as if they forced him to 
deliver the said castle ; and that he would lead the English into 
it, under the fraud of bein^ his own troops ; that on one side and 



1 82 PIRATES TAKE ST CATHARINE 

t'other there should he continual firing at one another, hut without 
hullets, or at least into the air, so that no side might receive any 
harm hy this device ; that thus having ohtained two such consider- 
ahle jorts, ike chief est of the isle, he needed not take care for the 
rest, which of necessity must fall hy course into his hands. 

These propositionsy every one, were granted by Captain 
Morgan, upon condition they should see them faithfully 
observed, for otherwise they should be used with all rigour 
imaginable : this they promised to do, and hereupon took 
their leaves, and returned to give account of their negotiation 
to the Governor. Presently after, Captain Morgan commanded 
the whole fleet to enter the port, and his men to be in readiness 
for to assault that night the castle of St Jerome. Thus the 
false alarm or battle began with incessant firing of great guns 
from both the castles against the ships, but without bullets, as 
was said before. Then the Pirates landed, and assaulted by 
night the lesser island, which they took, as also possession of 
both the fortresses, forcing all the Spaniards, in appearance, to 
fly unto the church. Before this assault Captain Morgan had 
sent word to the Governor he should keep all his men together 
in a body, otherwise, if the Pirates met any straggling 
Spaniards in the streets, they should certainly shoot them. 

The island being taken by this unusual stratagem, and all 
things put in due order, the Pirates began to make a new war 
against the poultry, cattle, and all sorts of victuals they could 
find. This was their whole employ for some days, scarce 
thinking of anything else than to kill those animals, roast, 
and eat, and make good cheer, as much as they could possibly 
attain unto. If wood was wanting, they presently fell upon 
the houses, and, pulling them down, made fires with the timber 
as had been done before in the field. The next day they num- 
bered all the prisoners they had taken upon the whole island, 
which were found to be in all 450 persons, between men, 
women, and children, viz. 190 soldiers belonging to the garrison, 
40 inhabitants who were married, 43 children, 34 slaves 
belonging to the King, with 8 children, 8 banditti ; 39 negroes 
belonging to private persons, with 27 female blacks and 34 
children. The Pirates disarmed all the Spaniards, and sent 
them out immediately unto the plantations to seek for pro- 
visions, leaving the women in the church, there to exercise 
their devotions. 



FORTRESSES OF THE ISLAND 183 

Soon after, they took a review of the whole island and all 
the fortresses belonging thereunto, which they found to be 
nine in all, as follows : the fort of St Jerome, nighest unto the 
bridge, had 8 great guns, of twelve, six, and eight pound 
carriage, together with 6 pipes of muskets, every pipe con- 
taining 10 muskets. Here they found still 60 muskets, with 
sufficient quantity of powder and all other sorts of ammunition. 
The second fortress, called St Matthew, had 3 guns, of 8 pound 
carriage each. The third and chief est among all the rest, 
named Santa Teresa, had 20 great guns, of 18, 12, 8, and 6 
pound carriage, with 10 pipes of muskets, like those we said 
before, and 90 muskets remaining, besides all other warlike 
ammunition. This castle was built with stone and mortar, 
with very thick walls on all sides, and a large ditch round 
about it of 20-foot depth, the which although it was dry was 
very hard to get over. Here was no entry but through one 
door, which corresponded to the middle of the castle. Within 
it was a mount or hill, almost inaccessible, with four pieces of 
cannon at the top, whence they could shoot directly into the 
port. On the sea side this castle was impregnable, by reason 
of the rocks which surrounded it and the sea beating furiously 
upon them. In like manner, on the side of the land, it was so 
commodiously seated on a mountain that there was no access 
to it but by a path of three or four foot broad. The fourth 
fortress was named St Augustine, having 3 guns, of eight and 
six pound carriage. The fifth, named La Plattaforma de la 
Concepcion, had only 2 guns, of eight pound carriage. The 
sixth, by name San Salvador, had likewise no more than 2 
guns. The seventh, being called Plattaforma de los Artilleros, 
had also 2 guns. The eight, called Santa Cruz, had 3 guns. 
The ninth, which was called St Joseph's Fort, had 6 guns, of 
twelve and eight pound carriage, besides two pipes of muskets 
and sufficient ammunition. 

In the storehouse were found above thirty-thousand pound 
of powder, with all other sorts of ammunition, which were 
transported by the Pirates on board the ships. All the guns 
were stopped and nailed, and the fortresses demolished, 
excepting that of St Jerome, where the Pirates kept their guard 
and residence. Captain Morgan inquired if any banditti were 
there from Panama or Porto Bello ; and hereupon three were 
brought before him, who pretended to be very expert in all 



1 84 BANDITTI ENGAGED AS GUIDES 

the avenues of those parts. He asked them if they would be 
his guides and show him the securest ways and passages unto 
Panama ; which if they performed, he promised them equal 
shares in all they should pillage and rob in that expedition, 
and that afterwards he would set them at liberty by trans- 
porting them unto Jamaica. These propositions pleased the 
banditti very well, and they readily accepted his proffers, 
promising to serve him very faithfully in all he should desire ; 
especially one of these three, who was the greatest rogue, thief, 
and assassin among them, and who had deserved for his 
crimes rather to be broken alive upon the wheel than punished 
with serving in a garrison. This wicked fellow had a great 
ascendancy over the other two banditti, and could domineer 
and command over them as he pleased, they not daring to 
refuse obedience to his orders. 

Hereupon Captain Morgan commanded four ships and one 
boat to be equipped and provided with all things necessary, for 
to go and take the castle of Chagre, seated upon the river of 
that name. Neither would he go himself with his whole fleet, 
fearing lest the Spaniards should be jealous of his farther 
designs upon Panama. In these vessels he caused to embark 
400 men, who went to put in execution the orders of their chief 
Commander Captain Morgan, while he himself remained be- 
hind in the island of St Catharine, with the rest of the fleet, 
expecting to hear the success of their arms. 



CHAPTER IV 

Captain Morgan takes the castle of Chagre with four hundred 
men sent unto this purpose from the Isle of St Catharine 

Captain Morgan, sending these four ships and a boat to the 
river of Chagre, chose for Vice-Admiral thereof a certain person 
named Captain Brodely. This man had been a long time in 
those quarters, and committed many robberies upon the 
Spaniards when Mansvelt took the isle of St Catharine, as was 
related in the Second Part of the history. He, being thereof 
well acquainted with those coasts, was thought a fit person for 
this exploit, his actions Hkewise having rendered him famous 
among the Pirates and their enemies the Spaniards. Captain 
Brodely being chosen Chief Commander of these forces, in 
three days after he departed from the presence of Captain 
Morgan arrived within sight of the said castle of Chagre, 
which by the Spaniards is called St Lawrence. This castle 
is built upon a high mountain, at the entry of the river, and 
surrounded on all sides with strong palisades, or wooden 
walls, being very well terre-pleined^, and filled with earth, 
which renders them as secure as the best walls made of stone 
or brick. The top of this mountain is in a manner divided into 
two parts, between which lies a ditch of the depth of thirty- 
foot. The castle itself has but one entry, and that by a draw- 
bridge which passes over the ditch aforementioned. On the 
land-side it had four bastions, that of the sea containing only 
two more. That part thereof which looks towards the South 
is totally inaccessible and impossible to be climbed, through 
the infinite asperity of the mountain. The North side is 

1 A French fortification term — the platform on top of a rampart : 
cf. " If it fall so out that you cannot make trauerses vppon the terre- 
plaine, for that the enemy doth hinder it . . ."-—Garrard, Art of Warre 
[1591]. p. 317. 

^8| 



1 86 THE CASTLE OF CHAGRE 

surrounded by the river, which hereabouts runs very broad. 
At the foot of the said castle, or rather mountain, is seated a 
strong fort, with eight great guns ; which commands and 
impedes the entry of the river. Not much lower are to be 
seen two other batteries, whereof each has 6 pieces of cannon, to 
defend likewise the mouth of the said river. At one side of 
the castle are built two great storehouses, in which are de- 
posited all sorts of warlike ammunition and merchandize, 
which are brought thither from the inner parts of the 
country. Nigh unto these houses is a high pair of stairs, 
hewed out of the rock, which serves to mount unto the 
top of the castle. On the West side of the said fortress lies 
a small port, which is not above seven or eight fathom 
deep, being very fit for small vessels, and of very good 
anchorage. Besides this, there lies before the castle, at the 
entry of the river, a great rock, scarce to be perceived above 
water, unless at low tides. 

No sooner had the Spaniards perceived the Pirates to come 
but they began to fire incessantly at them with the biggest of 
their guns. They came to an anchor in a small port, at the 
distance of a league more or less from the castle. The next 
morning very early they went on shore, and marched through 
the woods, to attack the castle on that side. This march 
continued until two of the clock of the afternoon before they 
could reach the castle, by reason of the difficulties of the way, 
and its mire and dirt. And, although their guides served them 
exactly, notwithstanding they came so nigh the castle at first 
that they lost many of their men with the shot from the guns, 
they being in an open place where nothing could cover nor 
defend them. This much perplexed the Pirates in their minds, 
they not knowing what to do, nor what course to take, for on 
that side of necessity they must make the assault, and, being 
uncovered from head to foot, they could not advance one 
step without great danger. Besides that, the castle, both for 
its situation and strength, did cause them much to fear the 
success of that enterprize. But to give it over they dared 
not, lest they should be reproached and scorned by their 
companions. 

At last, after many doubts and disputes among themselves, 
they resolved to hazard the assault and their lives after a most 
desperate manner. Thus they advanced towards the castle, 



ASSAULT ON THE CASTLE 187 

with their swords in one hand and fire-balls in the other. The 
Spaniards defended themselves very briskly, ceasing not to 
fire at them with their great guns and muskets continually, 
crying withal : Come on, ye English dogs, enemies to God and 
our King ; let your other companions that are behind come on 
too : ye shall not go to Panama this bout. After the Pirates had 
made some trial to chmb up the walls, they were forced to 
retreat, which they accordingly did, resting themselves until 
night. This being come, they returned to the assault, to try if 
by the help of their fire-balls they could overcome and pull 
down the pales before the wall. This they attempted to do, 
and while they were about it there happened a very remark- 
able accident, which gave them the opportunity of the victory. 
One of the Pirates was wounded with an arrow in his back, 
which pierced his body to the other side. This instantly he 
pulled out with great valour at the side of his breast : then, 
taking a little cotton that he had about him, he wound it about 
the said arrow, and putting it into his musket, he shot it back 
into the castle. But the cotton, being kindled by the powder, 
occasioned two or three houses that were within the castle, as 
being thatched with palm-leaves, to take fire, which the 
Spaniards perceived not so soon as was necessary. For this 
fire, meeting with a parcel of powder, blew it up, and thereby 
caused great ruin, and no less consternation, to the Spaniards, 
who were not able to occur unto ^ this accident, not having 
seen the beginning thereof. 

Thus the Pirates, perceiving the good effect of the arrow and 
the beginning of the misfortune of the Spaniards, were infinitely 
gladded thereat. And, while they were busied in extinguish- 
ing the fire, which caused great confusion in the whole castle, 
having not sufficient water wherewithal to do it, the Pirates 
made use of this opportunity, setting fire likewise unto the 
palisades. Thus the fire was seen at the same time in several 
parts about the castle, which gave them huge advantage 
against the Spaniards. For many breaches were made at 
once by the fire among the pales, great heaps of earth falling 
down into the ditch. Upon these the Pirates climbed up, 
and got over into the castle, notwithstanding that some 
Spaniards who were not busied about the fire cast down 
upon them many flaming pots, full of combustible matter 
» Latin occurrere, to meet, prevent, counteract. 



1 88 FIRING THE PALISADES 

and odious smells, which occasioned the loss of many of the 
English. 

The Spaniards, notwithstanding the great resistance they 
made, could not hinder the palisades from being entirely burnt 
before midnight. Meanwhile the Pirates ceased not to persist 
in their intention of taking the castle. Unto which effect, 
although the fire was great, they would creep upon the ground 
as nigh unto it as they could, and shoot amidst the flames 
against the Spaniards they could perceive on the other side, 
and thus cause many to fall dead from the walls. When day 
was come, they observed all the movable earth that lay be- 
twixt the pales to be fallen into the ditch in huge quantity. 
So that now those within the castle did in a manner lie equally 
exposed to them without, as had been on the contrary before. 
Whereupon the Pirates continued shooting very furiously 
against them, and killed great numbers of Spaniards. For 
the Governor had given them orders not to retire from those 
posts which corresponded to the heaps of earth fallen into 
the ditch, and caused the artillery to be transported unto 
the breeches. 

Notwithstanding, the fire within the castle still continued, 
and now the Pirates from abroad used what means they could 
to hinder its progress, by shooting incessantly against it. 
One party of the Pirates was employed only to this purpose, 
and another commanded to watch all the motions of the 
Spaniards, and take all opportunities against them. About 
noon the English happened to gain a breach, which the Gover- 
nor himself defended with twenty-five soldiers. Here was 
performed a very courageous and warlike resistance by the 
Spaniards, both with muskets, pikes, stones, and swords. Yet, 
notwithstanding, through all these arms the Pirates forced and 
fought their way, till at last they gained the castle. The 
Spaniards who remained alive cast themselves down from the 
castle into the sea, choosing rather to die precipitated by their 
own selves (few or none surviving the fall) than to ask any 
quarter for their lives. The Governor himself retreated unto 
the corps du garde, before which were placed two pieces of 
cannon. Here he intended still to defend himself ; neither 
would he demand any quarter. But at last he was killed with 
a musket-shot, which pierced his skull into the brain. 

The Governor being dead, and the corps du garde surrendered, 



CAPTURE OF THE CASTLE 189 

they found still remaining in it alive to the number of thirty 
men, whereof scarce ten were not wounded. These informed 
the Pirates that eight or nine of their soldiers had deserted 
their colours, and were gone to Panama to carry news of their 
arrival and invasion. These thirty men alone were remain- 
ing of 314 wherewith the castle was garrisoned, among which 
number not one officer was found alive. These were all made 
prisoners, and compelled to tell whatsoever they knew of their 
designs and enterprizes. Among other things they declared 
that the Governor of Panama had notice sent him three weeks 
ago from Cartagena, how that the English were equipping a 
fleet at Hispaniola, with design to came to take the said city 
of Panama. Moreover, that this their intention had been 
known by a person who was run away from the Pirates, at the 
river De la Hacha, where they provided their fleet with corn. 
That, upon this news, the said Governor had sent 164 men to 
strengthen the garrison of that castle, together with much 
provision and warlike ammunition ; the ordinary garrison 
whereof did only consist of 150 men ; so that in all they made 
the number aforementioned of 314 men, being all very well 
armed. Besides this they declared that the Governor of 
Panama had placed several ambuscades all along the river of 
Chagre ; and that he waited for their coming in the open fields 
of Panama, with 3600 men. 

The taking of this castle of Chagre cost the Pirates exces- 
sively dear in comparison to the small numbers they used to lose 
at other times and places : yea, their toil and labour here did far 
exceed what they sustained at the conquest of the isle of St 
Catharine and its adjacent. For, coming to number their 
men, they found they had lost above 100, besides those that 
were wounded, whose number exceeded 70 . They commanded 
the Spaniards that were prisoners to cast all the dead bodies 
of their own men down from the top of the mountain to the 
seaside, and afterwards to bury them. Such as were wounded 
were carried unto the church belonging to the castle, of which 
they made an hospital, and where also they shut up the women. 
Thus it was likewise turned into a place of prostitution, the 
Pirates ceasing not to defile the bodies of those afilicted 
widows with all manner of insolent actions and threats. 

Captain Morgan remained not long time behind at the isle 
of St Catharine, after taking the castle of Chagre ; of which he 



I90 ARRIVAL OF CAPTAIN MORGAN 

had noticed presently sent him. Yet notwithstanding, before 
he departed thence, he caused to be embarked all the pro- 
visions [that] could be found, together with great quantities 
of maize, or Indian wheat, and cassava, whereof in like manner 
is made bread in those parts. He commanded likewise great 
store of provisions should be transported unto the garrison 
of the aforesaid castle of Chagre, from what parts soever they 
could be gotten. At a certain place of the island they cast into 
the sea all guns belonging thereto, with a design to return and 
leave that island well garrisoned, unto the perpetual posses- 
sion of Pirates. Notwithstanding, he ordered all the houses 
and forts to be set on fire, excepting only the castle of St Teresa, 
which he judged to be the strongest and securest wherein to 
fortify himself at his return from Panama. He carried with 
him all the prisoners of the island, and thus set sail for the 
river of Chagre, where he arrived in the space of eight days. 
Here the joy of the whole fleet was so great, when they spied the 
English colours upon the castle, that they minded not their 
way into the river, which occasioned them to lose four of their 
ships at the entry thereof, that wherein Captain Morgan went 
being one of the four. Yet their fortune was so good as to be 
able to save all the men and goods that were in the said 
vessels — yea, the ships likewise had been preserved, if a strong 
northerly wind had not risen on that occasion, which cast the 
ships upon the rock above-mentioned that lies at the entry 
of the said river. 

Captain Morgan was brought into the castle with great 
acclamations of triumph and joy of all the Pirates, both of 
those who were within and also them that were but newly 
come. Having understood the whole transactions of the 
conquest, he commanded all the prisoners to begin to work 
and repair what was necessary — especially in setting up new 
palisades, or pales, round about the forts depending on the 
castle. There were still in the river some Spanish vessels, 
called by them chatten, which serve for the transportation of 
merchandize up and down the said river, as also for to go to 
Porto Bello and Nicaragua. These are commonly mounted 
with 2 great guns of iron and 4 other small ones of brass. All 
these vessels they seized on, together with 4 little ships they 
found there, and all the canoes. In the castle they left a 
garrison of 500 men, and in the ships within the river one- 



MORGAN DEPARTS FOR PANAMA 191 

hundred-and-fifty more. These things being done, Captain 
Morgan departed towards Panama, at the head of twelve 
hundred men. He carried very small provisions with him, 
being in good hopes he should provide himself sufficiently 
among the Spaniards, whom he knew to lie in ambuscade at 
several places by the way. 



CHAPTER V 

Captain Morgan departs from the Castle of Chagre, at the head of 
tivelve hundred men, with design to take the city of Panama 

Captain Morgan set forth from the castle of Chagre, to- 
wards Panama, the i8th day of August in the year 1670. 
He had under his conduct 1200 men, 5 boats with artillery 
and 32 canoes, all which were filled with the said people. 
Thus he steered his course up the river towards Panama. 
That day they sailed only six leagues, and came to a place 
called De los Bracos. Here a party of his men went on shore, 
only to sleep some few hours and stretch their limbs, they 
being almost crippled with lying too much crowded in the 
boats. After they had rested a while, they went abroad to see 
if any victuals could be found in the neighbouring plantations. 
But they could find none, the Spaniards being fled and carry- 
ing with them all the provisions they had. This day, being the 
first of their journey, there was amongst them such scarcity 
of victuals that the greatest part were forced to pass with 
only a pipe of tobacco, without any other refreshment. 

The next day, very early in the morning, they continued 
their journey, and came about evening to a place called Cruz 
de Juan Gallego. Here they were compelled to leave their 
boats and canoes, by reason the river was very dry for want of 
rain and the many obstacles of trees that were fallen into it. 

The guides told them that about two leagues farther on the 
country would be very good to continue the journey by land. 
Hereupon they left some companies, being in all 160 men, on 
board the boats to defend them, with intent they might serve 
for a place of refuge in case of necessity. 

The next morning, being the third day of their journey, 
they all went ashore, excepting those above-mentioned who 
were to keep the boats. Unto these Captain Morgan gave 
very strict orders, under great penalties, that no man, upon 

192 



PIRATES* JOURNEY TO PANAMA 195 

any pretext whatsoever should dare to leave the boats and go 
ashore. This he did, fearing lest they should be surprised and 
cut off by an ambuscade of Spaniards that might chance to 
lie thereabouts in the neighbouring woods, which appeared so 
thick as to seem almost impenetrable. Having this morning 
begun their march, they found the ways so dirty and irksome 
that Captain Morgan thought it more convenient to transport 
some of the men in canoes (though it could not be done without 
great labour) to a place farther up the river called Cedro 
Bueno. Thus they re-embarked, and the canoes returned 
for the rest that were left behind. So that about night they 
found themselves altogether at the said place. The Pirates 
were extremely desirous to meet any Spaniards or Indians, 
hoping to fill their bellies with what provisions they should 
take from them ; for now they were reduced almost to the 
very extremity of hunger. 

On the fourth day, the greatest part of the Pirates marched 
by land, being led by one of the guides. The rest went by 
water, farther up with the canoes, being conducted by another 
guide, who always went before them with two of the said 
canoes, to discover on both sides the river the ambuscades of 
the Spaniards. These had also spies, who were very dexter- 
ous, and could at any time give notice of all accidents or of 
the arrival of the Pirates six hours at least before they came to 
any place. This day about noon they found themselves 
nigh unto a post called Torna Cavallos. Here the guide of the 
canoes began to cry aloud he perceived an ambuscade. His 
voice caused infinite joy unto all the Pirates, as persuading 
themselves they should find some provisions wherewith to 
satiate their hunger, which was very great. Being come unto 
the place, they found nobody in it, the Spaniards who were 
there not long before being every one fled, and leaving nothing 
behind unless it were a small number of leather bags, all empty, 
and a few crumbs of bread scattered upon the ground where 
they had eaten. Being angry at this misfortune, they pulled 
down a few little huts which the Spaniards had made, and 
afterwards fell to eating the leathern bags, as being desirous to 
afford something to the ferment of their stomachs, which now 
was grown so sharp that it did gnaw their very bowels, having 
nothing else to prey upon. Thus they made a huge banquet 
upon those bags of leather, which doubtless had been more 



196 TRACES OF FURTHER AMBUSCADES 

grateful unto them if divers quarrels had not risen concerning ' 
who should have the greatest share. By the circumference 
of the place, they conjectured 500 Spaniards, more or less, 
had been there. And these, finding no victuals, they were now 
infinitely desirous to meet, intending to devour some of them 
rather than perish : whom they would certainly in that occasion 
have roasted or boiled, to satisfy their famine, had they been 
able to take them. 

After they had feasted themselves with those pieces of 
leather, they quitted the place, and marched farther on till 
they came about night to another post called Torna Munni. 
Here they found another ambuscade, but as barren and desert 
as the former. They searched the neighbouring woods, but 
could not find the least thing to eat, the Spaniards having 
been so provident as not to leave behind them anywhere the 
least crumb of sustenance, whereby the Pirates were now 
brought to the extremity aforementioned. Here again he was 
happy that had reserved since noon any small piece of leather 
whereof to make his supper, drinking after it a good draught of 
water for his greatest comfort. Some persons who never were 
out of their mothers' kitchens may ask how these Pirates could 
eat, swallow, and digest those pieces of leather, so hard and 
dry : unto whom I only answer : That could they once 
experiment what hunger, or rather famine, is, they would 
certainly find the manner, by their own necessity, as the Pirates 
did. For these first took the leather, and sliced it in pieces. 
Then did they beat it between two stones, and rub it, often 
dipping it in the water of the river to render it by these means 
supple and tender. Lastly, they scraped off the hair, and 
roasted or broiled it upon the fire. And, being thus cooked, 
they cut it into small morsels, and eat it, helping it down with 
frequent gulps of water, which by good fortune they had nigh 
at hand. 

They continued their march the fifth day, and about noon 
came unto a place called Barbacoa. Here Hkewise they 
found traces of another ambuscade, but the place totally as 
unprovided as the two preceding were. At a small distance 
were to be seen several plantations, which they searched very 
narrowly, but could not find any person, animal, or other thing 
that was capable of relieving their extreme and ravenous 
hunger. Finally, having ranged up and down and searched a 



SIXTH DAY OF THE MARCH 197 

long time, they found a certain grotto which seemed to be but 
lately hewn out of a rock, in the which they found two sacks 
of meal, wheat, and Hke things, with two great jars of wine, 
and certain fruits called planfanos^. Captain Morgan, know- 
ing that some of his men were now through the extremity of 
hunger reduced almost to the extremity of their lives, and 
fearing lest the major part should be brought into the same 
condition, caused all that was found to be distributed amongst 
them who were in greatest necessity. Having refreshed 
themselves with these victuals, they began to march anew with 
greater courage than ever. Such as could not well go for 
weakness were put into the canoes, and those commanded to 
land that were in them before. Thus they prosecuted their 
journey till late at night, at which time they came unto a 
plantation where they took up their rest ; but without eating 
anything at all, for the Spaniards, as before, had swept away all 
manner of provisions, leaving not behind them the least signs 
of victuals. 

On the sixth day they continued their march, part of them 
by land through the woods, and part by water in the canoes : 
howbeit they were constrained to rest themselves very fre- 
quently by the way, both for the ruggedness thereof and the 
extreme weakness they were under. Unto this they endeav- 
oured to occur^, by eating some leaves of trees and green herbs 
or grass such as they could pick, for such was the miserable 
condition they were in. This day, at noon, they arrived at a 
plantation, where they found a barn full of maize. Immed- 
iately they beat down the doors, and fell to eating of it dry, as 
much as they could devour. Afterwards they distributed 
great quantity, giving unto every man a good allowance there- 
of. Being thus provided, they prosecuted their journey, which 
having continued for the space of an hour or thereabouts, they 
met with an ambuscade of Indians. This they no sooner had 
discovered but they threw away their maize, with the sudden 
hopes they conceived of finding all things in abundance. But, 
after all this haste, they found themselves much deceived, 
they meeting neither Indians, nor victuals, nor anything else 

* Spanish, plantain, used for the tree or the fruit : cf. " . . . aiders, 
limas, plantanos, and palmas " — Mendoza, History of China, transl. by 
Parke [1589]. vol. ii, p. 330 (Hakluyt Soc. 1853-4). 

* Equivalent to ' this they endeavoured to counter ' — see note_on 
p. 187. 



198 SEVENTH DAY OF THE MARCH 

of what they had imagined. They saw notwithstanding on 
the other side of the river a troop of 100 Indians, more or less, 
who all escaped away through the agility of their feet. Some 
few Pirates there were who leapt into the river, the sooner to 
reach the shore, to see if they could take any of the said 
Indians prisoners. But all was in vain ; for, being much more 
nimble at their feet than the Pirates, they easily baffled their 
endeavours. Neither did they only baffle them, but killed also 
two or three of the Pirates with their arrows, howting^ at them 
at a distance, and crying : Ha ! perros, a la savana, a la 
savana ! Ha, ye dogs ! go to the plain ; go to the plain ! 

This day they could advance no farther, by reason they were 
necessitated to pass the river hereabouts to continue their 
march on the other side. Hereupon they took up their repose 
for that night : howbeit their sleep was not heavy nor pro- 
found, for great murmurings were heard that night in the 
camp, many complaining of Captain Morgan and his conduct 
in that enterprize, and being desirous to return home. On the 
contrary, others would rather die there than go back one step 
from what they had undertaken. But others who had greater 
courage than any of these two parties did laugh and joke at 
all their discourses. In the meanwhile they had a guide who 
much comforted them, saying : It would not he long before 
they met with people from whom they should reap some consider- 
able advantage. 

The seventh day in the morning they all made clean their 
arms, and every one discharged his pistol or musket, without 
bullet, to examine the security of their firelocks. This being 
done, they passed to the other side of the river in the canoes, 
leaving the post where they had rested the night before, 
called Santa Cruz. Thus they proceeded on their journey till 
noon, at which time they arrived at a village called Cruz. 
Being at a great distance as yet from the place, they perceived 
much smoke to arise out of the chimneys. The sight hereof 
afforded them great joy and hopes of finding people in the 
town, and afterwards what they most desired, which was 
plenty of good cheer. Thus they went on with as much haste 
as they could, making several arguments to one another upon 

^ hooting : cf. Nash, Pierce Penilesse [1592] : " The people poynted 
at her for a murtherer, yonge children howted at her as a strumpet." 
An onomatopoeic word. 



THEY REACH A DESERTED VILLAGE 199 

those external signs, though all like castles built in the air. 
For (said they) there is smoke coming out of every house — 
therefore they are making good fires, for to roast and boil what we 
are to eat. With other things to this purpose. 

At length they arrived there in great haste, all sweating and 
panting, but found no person in the town, nor anything that 
was eatable wherewith to refresh themselves, unless it were 
good fires to warm themselves, which they wanted not. For 
the Spaniards before their departure had every one set fire 
to his own house, excepting only the storehouses and stables 
belonging to the King. 

They had not left behind them any beast whatsoever, either 
alive or dead. This occasioned much confusion in their minds, 
they not finding the least thing to lay hold on, unless it were 
some few cats and dogs, which they immediately killed and 
devoured with great appetite. At last in the King's stables 
they found by good fortune fifteen or sixteen jars of Peru wine, 
and a leather sack full of bread. But no sooner had they 
begun to drink of the said wine when they fell sick, almost 
every man. This sudden disaster made them think that the 
wine was poisoned, which caused a new consternation in the 
whole camp, as judging themselves now to be irrecoverably 
lost. But the true reason was their huge want of sustenance 
in that whole voyage, and the manifold sorts of trash which 
they had eaten upon that occasion. Their sickness was so 
great that day as caused them to remain there till the next 
morning, without being able to prosecute their journey, as 
they used to do, in the afternoon. This village is seated in the 
latitude of 9 degrees and 2 minutes North, being distant from 
the river of Chagre 26 Spanish leagues, and 8 from Panama. 
Moreover, this is the last place unto which boats or canoes 
can come ; for which reason they built here storehouses, 
wherein to keep all sorts of merchandize, which hence to and 
from Panama are transported upon the backs of mules. 

Here, therefore. Captain Morgan was constrained to leave 
his canoes and land all his men, though never so weak in their 
bodies. But, lest the canoes should be surprized or take up 
too many men for their defence, he resolved to send them all 
back to the place where the boats were, excepting one, which 
he caused to be hidden, to the intent it might serve to carry 
intelligence according to the exigence of affairs. Many 



200 EIGHTH DAY OF THE MARCH 

of the Spaniards and Indians belonging to this village were fled 
unto the plantations thereabouts. Hereupon Captain Morgan 
gave express orders that none should dare to go out of the 
village except in whole companies of lOO together. The 
occasion hereof was his fear lest the enemies should take an 
advantage upon his men by any sudden assault. Notwith- 
standing, one party of English soldiers stickled not to con- 
travene these commands, being thereunto tempted with the 
desire of finding victuals. But these were soon glad to fly 
into the town again, being assaulted with great fury by some 
Spaniards and Indians, who snatched up one of the Pirates, 
and carried him away prisoner. Thus the vigilance and care 
of Captain Morgan was not sufficient to prevent every accident 
that might happen. 

On the eighth day in the morning Captain Morgan sent 
200 men before the body of his army, to discover the way to 
Panama, and see if they had laid any ambuscades therein. 
Especially considering that the places by which they were 
to pass were very fit for that purpose, the paths being so 
narrow that only ten or twelve persons could march in a file, 
and oftentimes not so many. Having marched about the space 
of ten hours, they came unto a place called Quebrada Obscura. 
Here, all on a sudden, three or four thousand arrows were shot at 
them, without being able to perceive whence they came or who 
shot them. The place whence it was presumed they were shot 
was a high rocky mountain, excavated from one side to the 
other, wherein was a grotto that went through it, only capable 
of admitting one horse or other beast laded. This multitude 
of arrows caused a huge alarm among the Pirates, especially 
because they could not discover the place whence they were 
discharged. At last, seeing no more arrows to appear, they 
marched a little farther, and entered into a wood. Here they 
perceived some Indians to fly as fast as they could possibly 
before them, to take the advantage of another post, and thence 
observe the march of the Pirates. There remained notwith- 
standing one troop of Indians upon the place, with full design 
to fight and defend themselves. This combat they performed 
with huge courage, till such time as their Captain fell to the 
ground wounded, who, although he was now in despair of life, 
yet his valour being greater than his strength, would demand 
no quarter, but, endeavouring to raise himself, with undaunted 



ENCOUNTER WITH INDIANS 201 

mind laid hold of his azagaya^, or javeHn, and struck at one of 
the Pirates. But, before he could second the blow, he was 
shot to death with a pistol. This was also the fate of many of 
his companions, who like good and courageous soldiers lost 
their lives with their Captain, for the defence of their country. 

The Pirates endeavoured, as much as was possible, to lay 
hold on some of the Indians and take them prisoners. But, 
they being infinitely swifter than the Pirates, everyone escaped, 
leaving eight Pirates dead upon the place and ten wounded : 
yea, had the Indians been more dexterous in military affairs, 
they might have defended that passage and not let one sole 
man to pass. Within a Httle while after they came to a large 
campaign-field open and full of variegated meadows. Hence 
they could perceive at a distance before them a parcel of Indians 
who stood on the top of a mountain, very nigh unto the way 
by which the Pirates were to pass. They sent a troop of fifty 
men, the nimblest they could pick out, to see if they could 
catch any of them and afterwards force them to declare where- 
abouts their companions had their mansions. But all their 
industry was in vain, for they escaped through their nimble- 
ness, and presently after showed themselves in another place, 
hallooing unto the English, and crying : A la savana, d la 
savana, cornudos, perros Ingleses I — that is. To the plain, to the 
plain, ye cuckolds, ye English dogs I While these things passed, 
the ten Pirates that were wounded a little before were dressed 
and plastered up. 

At this place there was a wood, and on each side thereof a 
mountain. The Indians had possessed themselves of the one, 
and the Pirates took possession of the other that was opposite 
unto it. Captain Morgan was persuaded that in the wood the 
Spaniards had placed an ambuscade, as lying so conveniently 
for that purpose. Hereupon he sent before 200 men to search 
it. The Spaniards and Indians perceiving the Pirates to 
decend the mountain, did so too, as if they designed to attack 
them. But, being got into the wood out of sight of the Pirates, 
they disappeared, and were seen no more, leaving the passage 
open to them. 

* The Spanish form of assegai, a dart or light spear used by the 
Moors. The French form was also in use in England in the sixteenth 
century : cf. " ... fought with speares, iauelyns, archegayes, and 
swerdes " — Froissart, Chronicles, transl. by Berners [1523], i, 237, 
p. 340 (181 2 edn.). 



202 NINTH DAY OF THE MARCH 

About night there fell a great rain, which caused the Pirates 
to march th6 faster and seek everywhere for houses wherein 
to preserve their arms from being wet. But the Indians had 
set fire to every one thereabouts, and transported all their 
cattle unto remote places, to the end that the Pirates, finding 
neither houses nor victuals, might be constrained to return 
homewards. Notwithstanding, after diligent search they 
found a few little huts belonging to shepherds, but in them 
nothing to eat. These not being capable of holding many men, 
they placed in them out of every company a small number, 
who kept the arms of all the rest of the army. Those who 
remained in the open field endured much hardship that night, 
the rain not ceasing to fall until the morning. 

The next morning, about break of day, being the ninth of 
this tedious journey. Captain Morgan continued his march 
while the fresh air of the morning lasted. For the clouds then 
hanging as yet over their heads were much more favourable 
unto them than the scorching rays of the sun, by reason the 
way was now more difficult and laborious than all the preceding. 
After two hours' march they discovered a troop of about 20 
Spaniards, who observed the motions of the Pirates. They 
endeavoured to catch some of them, but could lay hold on 
none, they suddenly disappearing, and absconding themselves 
in caves among the rocks totally unknown to the Pirates. At 
last they came to a high mountain, which, when they had 
ascended, they discovered from the top thereof the South Sea. 
This happy sight, as if it were the end of their labours, caused 
infinite joy among all the Pirates. Hence they could descry 
also one ship and six boats, which were set forth from Panama 
and sailed towards the islands of Tavogo and Tavogilla. 
Having descended this mountain, they came unto a vale, in 
which they found great quantity of cattle, whereof they killed 
good store. Here, while some were employed in killing and 
flaying of cows, horses, bulls, and chiefly asses, of which there 
was greatest number, others busied themselves in kindling of 
fires and getting wood wherewith to roast them. Thus cutting 
the flesh of these animals into convenient pieces, or goblets^, 
they threwthem into the fire, and, half-carbonadoed^ or roasted, 

* Morsels, something you can swallow. Later, ' gobbet,' a ' chunck.' 
A large block of stone is still called a ' gobbet ' by stonemasons. 

* Span., a piece of meat sliced and broiled, a rasher: cf. "... if I 



FIRST SIGHT OF PANAMA 203 

they devoured them with incredible haste and appetite. For 
such was their hunger that they more resembled cannibals 
than Europeans at this banquet, the blood many times running 
down from their beards unto the middle of their bodies. 

Having satisfied their hunger with these delicious meats, 
Captain Morgan ordered them to continue the march. Here 
again he sent before the main body 50 men, with intent to take 
some prisoners, if possibly they could. For he seemed now to be 
much concerned that in nine days' time he could not meet one 
person who might inform him of the condition and forces of the 
Spaniards. About evening they discovered a troop of 200 
Spaniards, more or less, who hallooed unto the Pirates, but 
these could not understand what they said. A little while 
after they came the first time within sight of the highest 
steeple of Panama. This steeple they no sooner had discovered 
but they began to show signs of extreme joy, casting up their 
hats into the air, leaping for mirth, and shouting, even just as 
if they had already obtained the victory and entire accomplish- 
ment of their designs. All their trumpets were sounded and 
every drum beaten, in token of this universal acclamation and 
huge alacrity of their minds. Thus they pitched their camp 
for that night with general content of the whole army, waiting 
with impatience for the morning, at which time they intended to 
attack the city. This evening there appeared 50 horse, who 
came out of the city, hearing the noise of the drums and trum- 
pets of the Pirates, to observe, as it was thought, their motions. 
They came almost within musket-shot of the army, being 
preceded by a trumpet that sounded marvellously well. Those 
on horseback halloed aloud to the Pirates, and threatened them, 
saying : Perros ! nos veremos I — that is, Ye dogs ! we shall 
meet ye ! Having made this menace, they returned into the 
city, excepting only seven or eight horsemen who remained 
hovering thereabouts, to watch what motions the Pirates 
made. Immediately after, the city began to fire, and ceased not 
to play with their biggest guns all night long against the camp, 
but with little or no harm unto the Pirates, whom they could 
not conveniently reach. About this time also the 200 Span- 
iards whom the pirates had seen in the afternoon appeared 
again within sight, making resemblance as if they would block 

come in his [way] willingly, let him make a carbonado of me " — 
Shakespeare, / Henry IV, V, iii, 6i. 



204 STRENGTH OF THE SPANISH FORCES 

up the passages, to the intent no Pirates might escape the 
hands of their forces. But the Pirates, who were now in a 
manner besieged, instead of conceiving any fear of their 
blockades, as soon as they had placed sentries about their 
camp, began every one to open their satchels, and, without any 
preparation of napkins or plates, fell to eating very heartily 
the remaining pieces of bulls' and horses' flesh which they had 
reserved since noon. This being done, they laid themselves 
down to sleep upon the grass with great repose and huge 
satisfaction, expecting only with impatience the dawning of 
the next day. 

On the tenth day, betimes in the morning, they put all 
their men into convenient order, and with drums and trumpets 
sounding, continued their march directly towards the city. 
But one of the guides desired Captain Morgan not to take the 
common highway that led thither, fearing lest they should find 
in it much resistance and many ambuscades. He presently 
took his advice, and chose another way that went through the 
wood, although very irksome and difficult. Thus the Span- 
iards, perceiving the Pirates had taken another way, which 
they scarce had thought on or believed, were compelled to 
leave their stops and batteries, and come out to meet them. 
The Governor of Panama put his forces in order, consisting 
of 2 squadrons, 4 regiments of foot, and a huge number of 
wild-bulls, which were driven by a great number of Indians, 
with some negroes and others, to help them. 

The Pirates, being now upon their march, came unto the 
top of a little hill, whence they had a little prospect of the city 
and campaign country underneath. Here they discovered 
the forces of the people of Panama extended in battle 
array, which, when they perceived to be so numerous, 
they were suddenly surprised with great fear, much doubt- 
ing the fortune of the day. Yea, few or none there were 
but wished themselves at home, or at least free from the 
obligation of that engagement, wherein they perceived their 
lives must be so narrowly concerned. Having been some time 
at a stand, in a wavering condition of mind, they at last 
reflected upon the straits they had brought themselves into, 
and that now they ought of necessity either to fight resolutely 
or die, for no quarter could be expected from an enemy against 
whom they had committed so many cruelties on all occasions. 



MARCH ON PANAMA 205 

Hereupon they encouraged one another, and resolved either to 
conquer, or spend the very last drop of blood in their bodies. 
Afterwards they divided themselves into three battalions, or 
troops, sending before them one of 200 Buccaneers, which sort 
of people are infinitely dexterous at shooting with guns. Thus 
the Pirates left the hill and descended, marching directly 
towards the Spaniards, who were posted in a spacious field 
waiting for their coming. As soon as they drew nigh unto them 
the Spaniards began to shout, and cry : Viva el Rey ! — God 
save the King ! — and immediately their horse began to move 
against the Pirates. But the field being full of quags and very 
soft underfoot, they could not ply to and fro and wheel about, 
as they desired. The 200 Buccaneers who went before, every 
one putting one knee to the ground, gave them a full volley of 
shot, wherewith the battle was instantly kindled very hot. The 
Spaniards defended themselves very courageously, acting all 
they could possibly perform to disorder the Pirates. Their 
foot, in Hke manner, endeavoured to second the horse, but were 
constrained by the Pirates to separate from them. Thus, 
finding themselves frustrated of their designs, they attempted 
to drive the bulls against them at their backs and by this 
means put them into disorder. But the greatest part of that 
wild cattle ran away, being frightened with the noise of the 
battle. And some few that broke through the English com- 
panies did no other harm than to tear the colours in pieces ; 
whereas the Buccaneers, shooting them dead, left not one to 
trouble them thereabouts. 

The battle, having now continued for the space of two hours, 
at the end thereof the greatest part of the Spanish horse was 
ruined and almost all killed. The rest fled away. Which 
being perceived by the foot, and that they could not possibly 
prevail, they discharged the shot they had in their muskets, 
and, throwing them on the ground, betook themselves to flight, 
every one which way he could run. The Pirates could not 
possibly follow them, as being too much harassed and wearied 
with the long journey they had lately made. Many of them, 
not being able to fly whither they desired, hid themselves for 
that present among the shrubs of the sea-side. But very 
unfortunately : for most of them being found out by the 
Pirates were instantly killed without giving quarter to any. 
Some religious men were brought prisoners before Captain 



2o6 MARCH ON PANAMA 

Morgan ; but he, being deaf to their cries and lamentations, 
commanded them all to be immediately pistoled, which was 
accordingly done. Soon after they brought a Captain to his 
presence, whom he examined very strictly about several things, 
particularly, wherein consisted the forces of those of Panama. 
Unto which he answered : Their whole strength did consist 
in 400 horse, 24 companies of foot, each being of 100 men com- 
plete, 60 Indians, and some negroes, who were to drive 2000 
wild-bulls and cause them to run over the English camp, and 
thus by breaking their files put them into a total disorder and 
confusion. He discovered more, that in the city they had 
made trenches and raised batteries in several places, in all 
which they had placed many guns, and that at the entry of the 
highway which led to the city they had built a fort, which was 
mounted with 8 great guns of brass, and defended by 50 men. 

Captain Morgan, having heard this information, gave orders 
instantly they should march another way. But, before setting 
forth, he made a review of all his men, whereof he found both 
killed and wounded a considerable number, and much greater 
than had been believed. Of the Spaniards were found 600 
dead upon the place, besides the wounded and prisoners. 
The Pirates were nothing discouraged seeing their number so 
much diminished, but rather filled with greater pride than 
before, perceiving what huge advantage they had obtained 
against their enemies. Thus having rested themselves some 
while, they prepared to march courageously towards the city, 
plighting their oaths to one another in general they would 
fight till never a man was left alive. With this courage they 
recommenced their march, either to conquer or be conquered, 
carrying with them all the prisoners. 

They found much difficulty in their approach unto the 
city. For within the town the Spaniards had placed many 
great guns, at several quarters thereof, some of which were 
charged with small pieces of iron and others with musket- 
bullets. With all these they saluted the Pirates, at their 
drawing nigh unto the place, and gave them full and frequent 
broadsides, firing at them incessantly. Whence it came to 
pass that unavoidably they lost, at every step they advanced, 
great numbers of men. But neither these manifest dangers 
of their lives, nor the sight of so many of their own as dropped 
down continually at their sides, could deter them from advan- 



FALL OF PANAMA 207 

cing farther, and gaining ground every moment upon the enemy. 
Thus, although the Spaniards never ceased to fire and act the 
best they could for their defence, yet notwithstanding they 
were forced to deliver the city after the space of three hours' 
combat. And the Pirates, having now possessed themselves 
thereof, both killed and destroyed as many as attempted to 
make the least opposition against them. The inhabitants 
had caused the best of their goods to be transported unto more 
remote and occult places. Howbeit they found within the 
city as yet several warehouses, very well stocked with all sorts 
of merchandize, as well silks and cloths as linen, and other 
things of considerable value. As soon as the first fury of their 
entrance into the city was over. Captain Morgan assembled 
all his men at a certain place which he assigned, and there 
commanded them under very great penalties that none of them 
should dare to drink or taste any wine. The reason he gave 
for this injunction was because he had received private intelli- 
gence that it had been all poisoned by the Spaniards. How- 
beit it was the opinion of many [that] he gave these prudent 
orders to prevent the debauchery of his people, which he foresaw 
would be very great at the beginning, after so much hunger 
sustained by the way : fearing withal lest the Spaniards, 
seeing them in wine, should rally their forces and fall upon 
the city, and use them as inhumanly as they had used the 
inhabitants before. 



CHAPTER VI 

Captain Morgan sends several canoes and boats unto the South Sea. 
He sets fire to the city of Panama. Robberies and cruelties 
committed there by the Pirates till their return to the Castle of 
Chagre 

Captain Morgan, as soon as he had placed guards at several 
quarters where he thought necessary, both within and without 
the city of Panama, immediately commanded twenty-five 
men to seize a great boat which had stuck in the mud of the 
port for want of water at a low tide, so that she could not put 
out to sea. The same day, about noon, he caused certain men 
privately to set fire unto several great edifices of the city, 
nobody knowing whence the fire proceeded nor who were the 
authors thereof, much less what motives persuaded Captain 
Morgan thereunto, which are as yet unknown to this day. 
The fire increased so fast that before night the greatest part of 
the city was in flame. Captain Morgan endeavoured to make 
the public believe the Spaniards had been the cause thereof, 
which suspicions he surmised among his own people, perceiving 
they reflected upon him for that action. Many of the Spaniards, 
as also some of the Pirates, used all means possible either to 
extinguish the flame or, by blowing up houses with gunpowder 
and pulling down others, to stop its progress. But all was in 
vain ; for in less than half-an-hour it consumed a whole street. 
All the houses of this city were built with cedar, being of very 
curious and magnificent structure, and richly adorned within, 
especially with hangings and paintings, whereof part was 
already transported out of the Pirates' way, and another great 
part was consumed by the voracity of the fire. 

There belonged unto this city (which is also the head of a 
bishopric) eight monasteries, whereof seven were for men and 
one for women, two stately churches, and one hospital. 

208 



THE CITY OF PANAMA FIRED 211 

The churches and monasteries were all richly adorned with 
altar-pieces and paintings, huge quantity of gods and silver, 
with other precious things ; all which the ecclesiastics had 
hidden and concealed. Besides which ornaments, here were 
to be seen 2000 houses of magnificent and prodigious building, 
as being all, or the greatest part, inhabited by merchants of that 
country, who are vastly rich. For the rest of the inhabitants 
of lesser quality and tradesmen, this city contained 5000 
houses more. Here were also great number of stables, which 
served for the horses and mules that carry all the plate, 
belonging as well to the King of Spain as to private men, 
towards the coast of the North Sea. The neighbouring fields 
belonging to this city are all cultivated with fertile plantations 
and pleasant gardens, which afford delicious prospects unto 
the inhabitants the whole year long. 

The Genoese had in this cityof Panama a stately and magnifi- 
cent house, belonging to their trade and commerce of negroes. 
This building likewise was commanded by Captain Morgan to 
be set on fire ; whereby it was burnt to the very ground. 
Besides which pile of building there were consumed to the 
number of 200 warehouses and great number of slaves who had 
hid themselves therein, together with an infinite multitude of 
sacks of meal. The fire of all which houses and buildings 
was seen to continue four weeks after the day it began. The 
Pirates in the meanwhile, at least the greatest part of them, 
encamped some time without the city, fearing and expecting 
that the Spaniards would come and fight them anew. For 
it was known they had an incomparable number of men more 
than the Pirates were. This occasioned them to keep the field, 
thereby to preserve their forces united, which now were very 
much diminished by the losses of the preceding battles, as also 
because they had a great many wounded, all which they had 
put into one of the churches which alone remained standing, 
the rest being consumed by the fire. Moreover, beside these 
decreases of their men, Captain Morgan had sent a convoy of 
150 men to the Castle of Chagre, to carry the news of his 
victory obtained against Panama. 

They saw many times whole troops of Spaniards cruize to 
and fro in the campaign-fields, which gave them occasion to 
suspect their rallying anew. Yet they never had the courage 
to attempt anything against the Pirates. In the afternoon of 



212 SEARCHING THE RUINS 

this fatal day Captain Morgan re-entered again the city with 
his troops, to the intent every one might take up his lodgings, 
which now they could hardly find, very few houses having 
escaped the desolation of the fire. Soon after, they fell to 
seeking very carefully among the ruins and ashes for utensils 
of plate or gold which peradventure were not quite wasted by 
the flames. And of such things they found no small number 
in several places, especially in wells and cisterns, where the 
Spaniards had hid them from the covetous search of the 
Pirates. 

The next day Captain Morgan dispatched away two troops 
of Pirates, of 150 men each, being all very stout soldiers and well 
armed, with orders to seek for the inhabitants of Panama who 
were escaped from the hands of their enemies. These men, 
having made several excursions up and down the campaign- 
fields, woods, and mountains adjoining to Panama, returned 
after two days' time, bringing with them above 200 prisoners, 
between men, women, and slaves. The same day returned 
also the boat above-mentioned, which Captain Morgan had 
sent into the South Sea, bringing with her three other boats, 
which they had taken in a little while. But all these prizes 
they could wilhngly have given, yea, although they had em- 
ployed greater labour into the bargain, for one certain galleon, 
which miraculously escaped their industry, being very richly 
laden with all the King's plate and great quantity of riches of 
gold, pearl, jewels, and other most precious goods, of all the 
best and richest merchants of Panama. On board of this 
galleon were also the religious women belonging to the nunnery 
of the said city, who had embarked with them all the orna- 
ments of their church, consisting in great quantity of gold, 
plate, and other things of great value. 

The strength of this galleon was nothing considerable, as 
having only 7 guns, and 10 or 12 muskets for its whole defence, 
being on the other side very ill provided of victuals and other 
necessaries, with great want of fresh water, and having no more 
sails than the uppermost sails of the main mast. This de- 
scription of the said ship the Pirates received from certain 
persons, who had spoken with seven mariners belonging to 
the galleon, at such time as they came ashore in the cock-boat 
to take in fresh water. Hence they concluded for certain 
they might easily have taken the said vessel, had they given 



SEARCH FOR THE RICH GALLEON 213 

her chase and pursued her, as they ought to do, especially 
considering the said galleon could not long subsist abroad at sea. 
But they were impeded from following this vastly rich prize 
by the lascivious exercises wherein they were totally at that 
present involved with women, which unto this effect they had 
carried with them and forced on board their boat. Unto this 
vice was also joined that of gluttony and drunkenness, having 
plentifully debauched themselves with several sorts of rich 
wines they found there ready to their hands. So that they 
chose rather to satiate their lust and appetite with the things 
above-mentioned than to lay hold on the occasion of such an 
huge advantage, although this only prize would certainly have 
been of far greater value and consequence unto them than all 
they purchased at Panama and other places thereabouts. 
The next day, repenting of their negligence and being totally 
wearied of the vices and debaucheries aforesaid, they sent forth 
to sea another boat well armed, to pursue with all speed 
imaginable the said galleon. But their present care and 
diligence was in vain, the Spaniards who were on board the 
said ship having received intelligence of the danger they were 
in one or two days before, while the Pirates were cruizing so 
nigh unto them, whereupon they fled unto places more remote 
and unknown to their enemies. 

Notwithstanding, the Pirates found in the ports of the 
islands of Tavoga and Tavogilla several boats that were laden 
with many sorts of very good merchandize — all which they 
took and brought unto Panama, where, being arrived, they 
made an exact relation of all that had passed while they were 
abroad unto Captain Morgan. The prisoners confirmed 
what the Pirates had said, adding thereunto that they un- 
doubtedly knew whereabouts the said galleon might be at the 
present, but that it was very probable they had been relieved 
before now from other places. These relations stirred up 
Captain Morgan anew to send forth all the boats that were in 
the port of Panama, with design to seek and pursue the said 
galleon till they could find her. The boats aforesaid, being in 
all four, set sail from Panama, and, having spent eight days 
in cruizing to and fro and searching several ports and creeks, 
they lost all their hopes of finding what they so earnestly 
sought for. Hereupon they resolved to return unto the isles 
of Tavoga and Tavogilla. Here they found a reasonable good 



214 NEW EXCURSIONS OF THE PIRATES 

ship that was newly come from Payta, being laden with cloth, 
soap, sugar, and biscuit, with 20,000 pieces-of-eight in ready 
money. This vessel they instantly seized, not finding the 
least resistance from any person within her. Nigh unto the 
said ship was also a boat, whereof in like manner they possessed 
themselves. Upon the boat they laded great part of the 
merchandize they had found in the ship, together with some 
slaves they had taken in the said islands. With this purchase 
they returned unto Panama, something better satisfied of 
their voyage, yet withal much discontented they could not 
meet with the galleon. 

The convoy which Captain Morgan had sent unto the Castle 
of Chagre returned much about the same time, bringing with 
them very good news. For while Captain Morgan was upon 
his journey to Panama, those he had left in the Castle of Chagre 
had sent forth to sea two boats to exercize piracy. These 
happened to meet with a Spanish ship, which they began to 
chase within sight of the Castle. This being perceived by the 
Pirates that were in the Castle, they put forth Spanish colours, 
thereby to allure and deceive the ship that fled before the boats. 
Thus the poor Spaniards, thinking to refuge themselves under 
the Castle and the guns thereof, by flying into the port were 
caught in a snare and made prisoners, where they thought to 
find defence. The cargo which was found on board the said 
vessel consisted in victuals and provisions, that were all eat- 
able things. Nothing could be more opportune than this 
prize for the Castle, where they had begun already to experi- 
ment^ great scarcity of things of this kind. 

This good fortune of the garrison of Chagre gave occasion 
unto Captain Morgan to remain longer time than he had 
determined at Panama. And hereupon he ordered several 
new excursions to be made into the whole country round 
about the city. So that, while the Pirates at Panama were 
employed in these expeditions, those at Chagre were busied 
in exercizing piracy upon the North Sea. Captain Morgan 
used to send forth daily parties of 200 men, to make inroads 
into all the fields and country thereabouts ; and, when one 
party came back, another consisting of 200 more was ready to 

* Experience. Cf. Day, English Secretary [1586], i : "Of his . . . 
good behaviour [I] have had sound and large experiment " ; Howell, 
Letters [1645], ii, 1 13 : "I know by experiments I have had of you . . ." 



BRUTALITY TO PRISONERS 215 

go forth. By this means they gathered in a short time huge 
quantity of riches and no lesser number of prisoners. These, 
being brought into the city, were presently put unto the most 
exquisite tortures imaginable, to make them confess both 
other people's goods and their own. Here it happened that 
one poor and miserable wretch was found in the house of a 
gentleman of great quality, who had put on, amidst that 
confusion of things, a pair of taffety breeches belonging to his 
master with a little silver key hanging at the strings thereof. 
This being perceived by the Pirates, they immediately asked 
him where was the cabinet of the said key. His answer was : 
He knew not what was become of it, hut only that, finding those 
breeches in his master's house, he had made bold to wear them. 
Not being able to extort any other confession out of him, 
they first put him upon the rack, wherewith they inhumanly 
disjointed his arms. After this, they twisted a cord about his 
forehead, which they wrung so hard that his eyes appeared as 
big as eggs and were ready to fall out of his skull. But neither 
with these torments could they obtain any positive answer to 
their demands. Whereupon they soon after hung him up 
by the testicles, giving him infinite blows and stripes while he 
was under that intolerable pain and posture of body. After- 
wards they cut off his nose and ears, and singed his face with 
burning straw, till he could speak nor lament his misery no 
longer. Then, losing all hopes of hearing any confession from 
his mouth, they commanded a negro to run him through with 
a lance, which put an end to his life and a period to their cruel 
and inhuman tortures. After this execrable manner did many 
others of those miserable prisoners finish their days, the 
common sport and recreation of these Pirates being these and 
other tragedies not inferior to these. 

They spared, in these their cruelties, no sex nor condition 
whatsoever. For, as to religious persons and priests, they 
granted them less quarter than unto others, unless they could 
produce a considerable sum of money, capable of being a 
sufficient ransom. Women themselves were no better used, 
except they would condescend unto the libidinous demands 
and concupiscency of the Pirates. For such as would not 
consent unto their lust were treated with all the rigour and 
cruelty imaginable. Captain Morgan, their leader and 
Commander, gave them no good example in this point. For, 



2i6 HISTORY OF A SPANISH LADY 

as soon as any beautiful woman was brought as a prisoner to 
his presence, he used all the means he could, both of rigour and 
mildness, to bend her to his lascivious will and pleasure : for 
a confirmation of which assertion, I shall here give my reader 
a short history of a lady whose virtue and constancy ought to 
be transmitted unto posterity, as a memorable example of her 
sex. 

Among the prisoners that were brought by the Pirates from 
the islands of Tavoga and Tavogilla, there was found a gentle- 
woman of good quality, as also no less virtue and chastity, 
who was wife unto one of the richest merchants of all those 
countries. Her years were but few, and her beauty so great 
as peradventure I may doubt whether in all Europe any could 
be found to surpass her perfections either of comeliness or 
honesty. Her husband, at that present, was absent from home, 
being gone as far as the kingdom of Peru, about great concerns 
of commerce and trade, wherein his employments did lie. 
This virtuous lady, likewise, hearing that Pirates were coming 
to assault the city of Panama, had absented herself thence in the 
company of other friends and relations, thereby to preserve her 
life amidst the dangers which the cruelties and tyrannies of 
those hard-hearted enemies did seem to menace unto every 
citizen. But no sooner had she appeared in the presence of 
Captain Morgan instantly she was designed for his voluptuous 
pleasures and concupiscence. Hereupon he commanded they 
should lodge her in a certain apartment by herself, giving her 
a negress, or black woman, to wait upon her, and that she 
should be treated with all the respect and regale[ment] due unto 
her quality. The poor afflicted lady did beg, with multitude 
of sobs and tears, she might be suffered to lodge among the 
other prisoners, her relations, fearing lest that unexpected 
kindness of the Commander might prove to be a design upon 
her chastity. But Captain Morgan would by no means hearken 
to her petition, and all he commanded, in answer thereunto, 
was she should be treated with more particular care than 
before, and have her victuals carried from his own table. 

This lady had formerly heard very strange reports concerning 
the Pirates, before their arrival at Panama, intimating unto her, 
as if they were not men, but, as they said, heretics, who did 
neither invoke the Blessed Trinity nor beheve in Jesus Christ. 
But now she began to have better thoughts of them than ever 



HISTORY OF A SPANISH LADY 217 

before, having experimented the manifold civiHties of Captain 
Morgan, especially hearing him many times to swear by the 
name of God and of Jesus Christ, in whom, she was persuaded, 
they did not believe. Neither did she now think them to be 
so bad, or to have the shapes of beasts, as from the relations 
of several people she had oftentimes heard. For, as to the 
name of ' robbers ' or ' thieves ', which was commonly given 
them by others, she wondered not much at it, seeing, as she said, 
that among all nations of the universe there were to be found 
some wicked men who naturally coveted to possess the goods of 
others. Conformable to the persuasion of this lady was the 
opinionof another woman, of weak understanding, at Panama, 
who used to say, before the Pirates came thither, she desired 
very much and had a great curiosity to see one of those men 
called Pirates, for as much as her husband had often told her 
that they were not men, like others, but rather irrational 
beasts. This silly woman, at last happening to see the first 
of them, cried out aloud, saying : Jesus bless me ! these thieves 
are like unto us Spaniards. 

This false civility of Captain Morgan, wherewith he used this 
lady, as a thing very common unto such persons as pretend and 
cannot obtain, was soon after changed into barbarous cruelty. 
For, three or four days being past, he came to see her, and 
entertained her with dishonest and lascivious discourses, 
opening unto her his ardent desires of enjoying the accomplish- 
ment of his lust. The virtuous lady constantly repulsed him, 
with all the civility imaginable and many humble and modest 
expressions of her mind. But Captain Morgan still persisted 
in his disorderly request, presenting her withal with much pearl, 
gold, and all that he had got that was precious and valuable in 
that voyage. But the lady, being in no manner wiUing to 
consent thereunto, nor accept his presents, and showing herself 
in all respects like unto Susannah for constancy, he presently 
changed note, and began to speak unto her in another tone, 
threatening her with a thousand cruelties and hard usages at his 
hands. Unto all these things she gave this resolute and 
positive answer, than which no other could be extorted from 
her ; Sir, my life is in your hands ; but, as to my body, in 
relation to that which you would persuade me unto, my soul 
shall sooner be separated from it, through the violence of your 
arms, than I shall condescend to your request. No sooner had 



2x8 MUTINY AMONG THE PIRATES 

Captain Morgan understood this heroic resolution of her mind 
than he commanded her to be stripped of the best of her 
apparel, and imprisoned in a darksome and stinking cellar. 
Here she had allowed her an extremely small quantity of meat 
and drink, wherewith she had much ado to sustain her life for 
a few days. 

Under this hardship the constant and virtuous lady ceased 
not to pray daily unto God Almighty for constancy and patience 
against the cruelties of Captain Morgan. But he, being now 
thoroughly convinced of her chaste resolutions, as also desirous 
to conceal the cause of her confinement and hard usage, since 
many of the Pirates, his companions, did compassionate her 
condition, laid many false accusations to her charge, giving to 
understand she held inteUigence with the Spaniards, and 
corresponded with them by letters, abusing thereby his former 
lenity and kindness. I myself was an eye-witness unto these 
things here related, and could never have judged such con- 
stancy of mind and virtuous chastity to be found in the world, 
if my own eyes and ears had not informed me thereof. But of 
this incomparable lady I shall say something more hereafter 
in its proper place ; whereupon I shall leave her at present, to 
continue my history. 

Captain Morgan, having now been at Panama the full space 
of three weeks, commanded all things to be put in order for 
his departure. Unto this effect, he gave orders to every com- 
pany of his men to seek out for so many beasts of carriage as 
might suffice to convey the whole spoil of the city to the river 
where his canoes lay. About this time a great rumour was 
spread in the city of a considerable number of Pirates who in- 
tended to leave Captain Morgan ; and that, by taking a ship 
which was in the port, they determined to go and rob upon the 
South Sea till they had got as much as they thought fit, and 
then return homewards by the way of the East Indies into 
Europe. For which purpose they had already gathered great 
quantity of provisions, which they had hidden in private places, 
with sufficient store of powder, bullets, and all other sorts of 
ammunition ; likewise some great guns belonging to the town, 
muskets, and other things, wherewith they designed not only 
to equip the said vessel but also to fortify themselves and raise 
batteries in some island or other, which might serve them for a 
place of refuge. 



MORGAN DEPARTS FROM PANAMA 219 

This design had certainly taken effect as they intended, 
had not Captain Morgan had timely advice thereof 
given him by one of their comrades. Hereupon he in- 
stantly commanded the main-mast of the said ship should 
be cut down and burnt, together with all the other 
boats that were in the port. Hereby the intentions of 
all or most of his companions were totally frustrated. 
After this, Captain Morgan sent forth many of the Spaniards 
into the adjoining fields and country, to seek for money 
wherewith to ransom not only themselves but also all the rest 
of the prisoners, as likewise the ecclesiastics, both secular and 
regular. Moreover, he commanded all the artillery of the 
town to be spoiled, that is to say, nailed and stopped up. At 
the same time he sent out a strong companj^ of men to seek for 
the Governor of Panama, of whom intelligence was brought 
that he had laid several ambuscades in the way by which he 
ought to pass at his return. But those who were sent upon 
this design returned soon after, saying they had not found any 
sign or appearance of any such ambuscades; for a confirmation 
whereof, they brought with them some prisoners they had 
taken, who declared how that the said Governor had had an 
intention of making some opposition by the way, but that the 
men whom he had designed to effect it were unwilling to 
undertake any such enterprize, so that, for want of means, he 
could not put his design in execution. 

On the 24th of February of the year 1671 Captain Morgan 
departed from the city of Panama, or rather from the place 
where the said city of Panama did stand ; of the spoils whereof 
he carried with him 175 beasts of carriage, laden with silver, 
gold, and other precious things, besides 600 prisoners, more or 
less, between men, women, children, and slaves. That day 
they came unto a river that passes through a delicious cam- 
paign-field, at the distance of a league from Panama. Here 
Captain Morgan put all his forces into good order of martial 
array, in such manner as that the prisoners were in the middle 
of the camp, surrounded on all sides with Pirates. At which 
present conjuncture nothing else was to be heard but lamen- 
tations, cries, shrieks, and doleful sighs, of so many women and 
children, who were persuaded Captain Morgan designed to 
transport them all and carry them into his own country for 
slaves. Besides that,, among all those miserable prisoners, 



220 THE SPANISH LADY LIBERATED 

there was extreme hunger and thirst endured at that time ; 
which hardship and misery Captain Morgan designedly caused 
them to sustain, with intent to excite them more earnestly to 
seek for moneys wherewith to ransom themselves, according 
to the tax he had set upon every one. Many of the women 
begged of Captain Morgan upon their knees, with infinite sighs 
and tears, he would permit to return unto Panama ; there to 
live in company of their dear husbands and children, in little 
huts of straw which they would erect, seeing they had no houses 
until the rebuilding of the city. But his answer was : he 
came not thither to hear lamentations and cries, but rather to 
seek moneys. Therefore they ought to seek out for that in 
the first place, wherever it were to be had, and bring it to 
him, otherwise he would assuredly transport them all unto 
such places whither they cared not to go. 

The next day, when the march began, those lamentable cries 
and shrieks were renewed, in so much as it would have caused 
compassion in the hardest heart to hear them. But Captain 
Morgan, as a man little given to mercy, was not moved there- 
with in the least. They marched in the same order as was said 
before, one party of the Pirates preceding in the van, the 
prisoners in the middle, and the rest of the Pirates in the rear- 
guard, by whom the miserable Spaniards were, at every step, 
punched and thrust in their backs and sides with the blunt 
end of their arms, to make them march the faster. That 
beautiful and virtuous lady, of whom we made mention here- 
tofore, for her unparalleled constancy and chastity, was 
led prisoner by herself, between two Pirates who guarded her. 
Her lamentations now did pierce the skies, seeing herself 
carried away into foreign captivity, often crying unto the 
Pirates, and telling them : That she had given order unto two 
religious persons, in whom she had relied, to go unto a certain 
place and fetch so much money as her ransom did amount unto. 
That they had promised faithfully to do it, hut, having obtained 
the said money, instead of bringing it unto her they had employed 
it another way, to ransom some of their own and particular 
friends. This ill-action of theirs was discovered by a slave, 
who brought a letter unto the said lady. Her complaints, and 
the cause thereof, being brought unto the ears of Captain 
Morgan, he thought fit to inquire thereinto. Having found 
the thing to be true, especially hearing it confirmed by the 



EVERYONE SEARCHED 221 

confession of the said religious men, though under some 
frivolous excuses, of having diverted the money but for a day 
or two within which time they expected more sums to repay 
it, he gave hberty unto the said lady, whom otherwise he 
designed to transport unto Jamaica. But in the meanwhile 
he detained the said religious men as prisoners in her place, 
using them according to the deserts of their incompassionate 
intrigues. 

As soon as Captain Morgan arrived, upon his march, at the 
town called Cruz, seated on the banks of the river Chagre as 
was mentioned before, he commanded an order to be published 
among the prisoners that within the space of three days every 
one of them should bring in his ransom, under the penalty 
aforementioned of being transported unto Jamaica. In the 
meanwhile he gave orders for so much rice and maize to be 
collected thereabouts as was necessary for the victuaUing all 
his ships. At this place some of the prisoners were ransomed, 
but many others could not bring in their moneys in so short 
time. Hereupon he continued his voyage, leaving the village 
on the 5th day of March next following, and carrying with him 
all the spoil that ever he could transport. From this village he 
likewise led away some new prisoners who were inhabitants 
of the said place. So that these prisoners were added unto those 
of Panama who had not as yet paid their ransoms, and all 
transported. But the two religious men who had diverted the 
money belonging to the lady were ransomed three days after 
their imprisonment, by other persons who had more compassion 
for their condition than they had showed for hers. About the 
middle of the way unto the Castle of Chagre Captain Morgan 
commanded them to be placed in due order, according to their 
custom, and caused every one to be sworn that they had re- 
served nor concealed nothing privately to themselves, even 
not so much as the value of sixpence. This being done. 
Captain Morgan having had some experience that those lewd 
fellows would not much stickle to swear falsely in points of 
interest, he commanded every one to be searched very strictly, 
both in their clothes and satchels and everywhere it might be 
presumed they had reserved anything. Yea, to the intent 
this order might not be ill taken by his companions, he per- 
mitted himself to be searched, even to the very soles of his 
shoes. Unto this effect, by common consent, there was as- 



222 DIVISION OF THE BOOTY 

signed one out of every company to be the searchers of all the 
rest. The French Pirates that went on this expedition with 
Captain Morgan were not well satisfied with this new custom of 
searching, Yet their number being less than that of the 
Enghsh, they were forced to submit unto it, as well as the 
others had done before them. The search being over, they re- 
embarked in their canoes and boats, which attended them on 
the river, and arrived at the Castle of Chagre on the 9th day 
of the said month of March. Here they found all things in 
good order, excepting the wounded men whom they had left 
there at the time of their departure. For of these the greatest 
number were dead, through the wounds they had received. 

From Chagre Captain Morgan sent presently after his arrival 
a great boat to Porto Bello, wherein were all the prisoners he 
had taken at the isle of St Catharine, demanding by them a 
considerable ransom for the Castle of Chagre, where he then 
was, threatening otherwise to ruin and demolish it even to the 
ground. Unto this message those of Porto Bello made answer : 
They would not give one farthing towards the ransom of the said 
castle, and that the English might do with it as they pleased. 
This answer being come, the dividend was made of all the 
spoil they had purchased in that voyage. Thus every com- 
pany and every particular person therein included received 
their portion of what was gotten, or, rather, what part thereof 
Captain Morgan was pleased to give them. For so it was, that 
the rest of his companions, even of his own nation, complained 
of his proceedings in this particular, and feared not to tell him 
openly to his face that he had reserved the best jewels to him- 
self. For they judged it impossible that no greater share should 
belong to them than 200 pieces-of-eight per capita, of so many 
valuable purchases and robberies as they had obtained — which 
small sum they thought too little reward for so much labour and 
such huge and manifest dangers as they had so often exposed 
their lives unto. But Captain Morgan was deaf unto all these 
and many other complaints of this kind, as having designed in 
his mind to cheat them of as much as he could. 

At last Captain Morgan, finding himself obnoxious to many 
obloquies and detractions among his people, began to fear 
the consequence thereof, and hereupon, thinking it unsafe to 
remain any longer time at Chagre, he commanded the ordnance 
of the said Castle to be carried on board his ship. Afterwards 



MORGAN STEALS AWAY 223 

he caused the greatest part of the walls to be demolished, and 
the edifices to be burnt, and as many other things spoiled and 
ruined as could conveniently be done in a short while. These 
orders being performed, he went secretly on board his own 
ship, without giving any notice of his departure unto his 
companions, nor calling any council, as he used to do. Thus 
he set sail and put out to sea, not bidding anybody adieu, 
being only followed by three or four vessels of the whole fleet. 
These were such (as the French Pirates believed) as went 
shares with Captain Morgan towards the best and greatest 
part of the spoil which had been concealed from them in the 
dividend. The Frenchmen could very willingly have revenged 
this affront upon Captain Morgan and those that followed 
him, had they found themselves with sufficient means to 
encounter him at sea. But they were destitute of most things 
necessary thereunto — yea, they had much ado to find suffi- 
cient victuals and provisions for their voyage to Jamaica, 
he having left them totally unprovided of all things. • 



CHAPTER VII 

Of a voyage made by the author along the coasts of Costa Rica, at 
his return towards Jamaica. What happened most remark- 
able in the said voyage. Some observations made by him at 
that time 

Captain Morgan left us all in such a miserable condition as 
might serve for a lively representation of what reward attends 
wickedness at the latter end of Hfe — whence we ought to have 
learned how to regulate and amend our actions for the future. 
However it was, our affairs being reduced to such a posture, 
every company that was left behind, whether English or 
French, were compelled to seek what means they could to 
help themselves. Thus most of them separated from each 
other, and several companies took several courses at their 
return homewards. As for that party to which I belonged, 
we steered our voj^age along the coast of Costa Rica, where 
we intended to purchase some provisions and careen our 
vessel in some secure place or other. For the boat wherein 
we were was now grown so foul as to be rendered totally unfit 
for sailing. In few days we arrived at a great port, called 
Boca del Toro, where are always to be found an huge quantity 
of good and eatable tortoises. The circumference hereof is 
10 leagues, more or less, being surrounded with little islands, 
under which vessels may ride very secure from the violence 
of the winds. 

The said islands are inhabited by Indians, who never 
could be subjugated by the Spaniards, and hence they give 
them the name of Indios bravos, or Wild Indians. They are 
divided, according to the variety of idioms of their language, 
into several customs and fashions of people, whence arises 
that they have perpetual wars against one another. Towards 
the east side of this port are found some of them who formerly 

224 



INDIOS BRAFOS, OR WILD INDIANS 225 

did much trade with the Pirates, seUing unto them the flesh 
of divers animals which they hunt in their countries, as also 
all sorts of fruits that the land produces. The exchange of 
which commodities was iron instruments that the Pirates 
brought [with] them, beads, and other toys, whereof they 
made great account for wearing, more than of precious jewels, 
which they knew not nor esteemed in the least. This commerce 
afterwards failed, because the Pirates committed many bar- 
barous inhumanities against them, killing many of their men 
on a certain occasion, and taking away their women to serve 
their disordinate lust. These abuses gave sufficient cause for 
a perpetual cessation of all friendship and commerce between 
them and the Pirates. 

We went ashore with design to seek provisions, our necessity 
being now almost extreme. But our fortune was so bad that 
we could find nothing else than a few eggs of crocodiles, where- 
with we were forced to content ourselves for that present. 
Hereupon we left those quarters, and steered our course east- 
wards. Being upon this tack, we met with three boats more 
of our own companions, who had been left behind by Captain 
Morgan. These told us they had been able to find no relief 
for the extreme hunger they sustained ; moreover, that 
Captain Morgan himself and all his people were already 
reduced to such misery that he could afford them no more 
allowance than once a day, and that very short too. 

We, therefore, hearing from these boats that Uttle or no 
good was like to be done by sailing farther eastwards, changed 
our course, and steered towards the west. Here we found 
an excessive quantity of tortoises, more than we needed for 
the victualling our boats, should we be never so long without 
any other flesh or fish. Having provided ourselves with 
this sort of victuals, the next thing we wanted was fresh water. 
There was enough to be had in the neighbouring islands, but 
we scarce dared to land on them, by reason of the enmity 
above mentioned between us and the Pirates and those Indians. 
Notwithstanding, necessity having no law, we were forced 
to do as we could, rather than as we desired to do. And 
hereupon we resolved to go all of us together unto one of 
the said islands. Being landed, one party of our men went to 
range in the woods, while another filled the barrels with water. 
Scarce one whole hour was past, after our people were got 



226 ASSAULTED BY THE INDIANS 

ashore, when suddenly the Indians came upon us, and we 
heard one of our men cry : Arm! arm ! We presently took up 
our arms, and began to fire at them as hot as we could. This 
caused them to advance no farther, and in a short while put 
them to flight, sheltering themselves, in the woods. We 
pursued them some part of the way, but not far, by reason 
we then esteemed rather to get in our water than any other 
advantages upon the enemy. Coming back, we found two 
Indians dead upon the shore, whereof the habiUments of 
one gave us to understand he was a person of quahty amongst 
them. For he had about his body a girdle, or sash, very richly 
woven ; and on his face he wore a beard of massive gold — I 
mean, a small planch^ of gold hung down at his lips by two 
strings (which penetrated two little holes, made there on 
purpose) that covered his beard, or served instead thereof. 
His arms were made of sticks of palmetto-trees, being very 
curiously wrought, at one end whereof was a kind of hook, 
which seemed to be hardened with fire. We could willingly 
have had opportunity to speak with some of these Indians, 
to see if we could reconcile their minds unto us, and by this 
means renew the former trade with them, and obtain pro- 
visions. But this was a thing impossible, through the wildness 
of their persons and savageness of their minds. Notwith- 
standing, this encounter hindered us not from filling our 
barrels with water, and carrying them aboard. 

The night following we heard from the shore huge cries 
and shrieks among the Indians. These lamentations caused 
us to believe, because they were heard so far, they had called 
in much more people to aid them against us ; as, also, that 
they lamented the death of those two men who were killed 
the day before. These Indians never come upon the waters 
of the sea, neither have they ever given themselves to build 
canoes or any other sort of vessels for navigation — not so 
much as fisher-boats, of which art of fishery they are totally 
ignorant. At last, having nothing else to hope for in these 
parts, we resolved to depart thence for Jamaica, whither we 
designed to go. Being set forth, we met with contrary winds, 
which caused us to make use of our oars, and row as far as 
the river of Chagre. When we came nigh unto it, we perceived 

1 (plank), slab. Cf. transl. of The Conquest of West India [1578], 
233 : "... there sawe golde in planches like bricke battes." 



THE SEA-COW 227 

a ship that made towards us, and began to give us chase. 
Our apprehensions were that it was a ship from Cartagena, 
which might be sent to rebuild and retake possession of the 
Castle of Chagre, now all the Pirates were departed thence. 
Hereupon we set all our sail and ran before the wind, to see 
if we could escape or refuge ourselves in any place. But the 
vessel, being much swifter and cleaner than ours, easily got 
the wind of us, and stopped our course. Then approaching 
nigh unto us, we discovered that they were, and knew them 
to be our former comrades, in the same expedition of Panama, 
who were but lately set out from Chagre. Their design was 
to go unto Nombre de Dios, and thence to Cartagena, to seek 
some purchase or other in or about that frequented port. 
But, the wind at that present being contrary to their intention, 
they concluded to go in our company towards the same place 
where we were before, called Boca del Toro. 

This accident and encounter retarded our journey, in the 
space of two days, more than we could regain in a whole fort- 
night. This was the occasion that obliged us to return to our 
former station, where we remained for a few days. Thence 
we directed our course for a place called Boca del Dragon, 
there to make provisions of flesh, especially of a certain animal 
which the Spaniards call maneniines^, and the Dutch ' sea- 
cows *, because the head, nose, and teeth of this beast are very 
like unto those of a cow. They are found commonly in such 
places as under the depth of the waters are very full of grass, 
on which, it is thought, they do pasture. These animals have 
no ears, and only in place of them are to be seen two little 
holes, scarce capable of receiving the little finger of a man. 
Nigh unto the neck they have two wings, under which are 
seated two udders or breasts, much like unto the breasts 
of a woman. The skin is very close and united together, 
resembhng the skin of a Barbary (or Guinea) dog. This skin 
upon the back is of the thickness of two fingers, which, being 
dried, is as hard as any whalebone, and may serve to make 
walking-staffs withal. The belly is in all things Uke unto that 
of a cow, as far as the kidneys, or reins. Their manner of 

^ Manatee, Span, tnanati, an aquatic mammal, at one time supposed 
to have originated the legends of the mermaids. Cf. Eden, Decades, 
section ii (1555) : "... also manates, and murene, and manye other 
fysshes which haue no names in oure language." 



22 8 THE SEA-COW 

engendering, likewise, is the same with the usual manner of 
a land-cow, the male of this kind being in simiUtude almost 
one and the same thing with a bull. Yet, notwithstanding, 
they conceive and breed but once. But the space of time 
that they go with calf, I could not as yet learn. These fishes 
have the sense of hearing extremely acute, in so much that 
in taking them the fisherman ought not to make the least 
noise, nor row, unless it be very slightly. For this reason 
they make use of certain instruments for rowing which the 
Indians call pagayos'^, and the Spaniards name caneletas, 
with which although they row, yet it is performed without 
any noise that can fright the fish. While they are busied in 
this fishery, they use not speak to one another, but all is 
transacted by signs. He that darts them with the javelin 
uses it after the same manner as when they kill tortoises. 
Howbeit, the point of the said javelin is somewhat different, 
as having two hooks at the extremity, and these longer than 
that of the other fishery. Of these fishes some are found to 
be of the length of twenty unto twenty-four foot. Their 
flesh is very good to eat, being very like in colour unto that 
of a land-cow, but in taste unto that of pork. It contains 
much fat, or grease, which the Pirates use to melt and keep 
in earthen pots, to make use thereof instead of oil. 

On a certain day, wherein we were not able to do any good 
at this sort of fishery, some of our men went into the woods 
to hunt, and others to catch other fish. Soon after we espied 
a canoe, wherein were two Indians. These no sooner had 
discovered our vessels but they rowed back with all the speed 
they could towards the land, being unwilling to trade or have 
anything to do with us Pirates. We followed them to the shore, 
but through their natural nimbleness, being much greater than 
ours, they retired into the woods before we could overtake them. 
Yea, what was more admirable, they drew on shore and car- 
ried with them their canoe into the wood as easily as if it were 
made of straw, although it weighed above 2000 pounds. 
This we knew by the canoe itself, which we found afterwards 
and had much ado to get it into the water again, although we 
were in all eleven persons to pull at it. 

^ Cf. " . . . for this reason they use certain instruments for rowing 
by the Indians called pagayos, with which they row without any noise 
to fright the fish." — Description of the Isthmus of Darien [1699], p. 9 — 
evidently derived from this book. 



RIO DE ZUERA 229 

We had at that time in oiir company a certain pilot who 
had been divers times in those quarters. This man, seeing 
this action of the Indians, told us that some few years before 
a squadron of Pirates happened to arrive at that place. Being 
there, they went in canoes to catch a certain sort of Httle 
birds, which inhabits the sea-coast under the shade of very 
beautiful trees, which here are to be seen. While they were 
busied at that work, certain Indians who had climbed up 
into the trees to view their actions, seeing now the canoes 
underneath, leaped down into the sea, and with huge celerity 
seized some of the canoes and Pirates that kept them, both 
which they transported so nimbly into the remotest parts of 
the woods as that the prisoners could not be relieved by their 
companions. Hereupon the Admiral of the said squadron 
landed presently after with 500 men, to seek and rescue the 
men he had lost. But they saw such an excessive number of 
Indians flock together to oppose them as obliged them to 
retreat with all possible diHgence unto their ships, concluding 
among themselves that, if such forces as those could not 
perform anything towards the recovery of their companions, 
they ought to stay no longer time there. Having heard this 
history, we came away thence, fearing some mischief might 
befall us, and bringing with us the canoe aforementioned. 
In this we found nothing else but a fishing-net, though not 
very large, and four arrows made of palm-tree, of the length 
of seven-foot each and of the figure, or shape, as follows. 



^^^^ 



TT 



These arrows we believed to be their arms. The canoe 
we brought away was made of cedar, but very roughly hewn 
and poHshed, which caused us to think that those people 
have no instruments of iron. 

We left that place, and arrived in twenty-four hours at 
another called Rio de Zeura, where we found some few houses 
belonging to the city of Cartagena. These houses are inhabited 
by Spaniards, whom we resolved to visit, not being able to 
find any tortoises nor yet any of their eggs. The inhabitants 
were all fled from the said houses, having left no victuals 



230 PORCUPINES; PHEASANTS 

nor provisions behind them, in so much that we were forced 
to content ourselves with a certain fruit, which there is called 
plantano. Of these plantanos we filled our boats, and continued 
our voyage, coasting along the shore. Our design was to 
find out some creek or bay wherein to careen our vessel, which 
now was very leaky on all sides — yea, in such a dangerous 
condition that both night and day we were constrained to 
employ several men at the pump, unto which purpose we 
made use of all our slaves. This voyage lasted a whole fort- 
night, all which time we lay under the continual frights of 
perishing every moment. At last we arrived at a certain port 
called the Bay of Bleevelt, being so named from a pirate who 
used to resort thither with the same design that we did. Here 
one party of our men went into the woods to hunt, while 
another undertook to refit and careen our vessel. 

Our companions who went abroad to hunt found here- 
abouts porcupines of a huge and monstrous bigness. But their 
chief exercise was kilhng of monkeys, and certain birds called 
by the Spaniards faisanes, or pheasants. The toil and labour 
we had in this employment of shooting did seem, at least 
unto me, to be sufficiently compensated with the pleasure of 
killing the said monkeys. For at these we usually made 
fifteen to sixteen shots before we could kill three or four of 
them, so nimbly would they escape our hands and aim, even 
after being desperately wounded. On the other side, it was 
delightful to see the female monkeys carry their little ones 
upon their backs, even just as the negresses do their children. 
When any person passes under the trees where these monkeys 
are sitting, they will commonly open their bellies and squirt 
their excrement upon their heads and clothes. Likewise, 
if shooting at a parcel of them, any monkey happens to be 
wounded, the rest of the company will flock about him, and 
lay their hands upon the wound, to hinder the blood from 
issuing forth. Others will gather moss that grows upon the 
trees, and thrust it into the wound, and thereby stop the blood. 
At other times they will gather such or such herbs, and, chew- 
ing them in their mouth, apply them after the manner of a 
poultice, or cataplasm. All which things did cause in me 
great admiration, seeing such strange actions in those irra- 
tional creatures, which testified the fidelity and love they had 
for one another. 



INDIANS SLAUGHTER TWO WOMEN 231 

On the 9th day after our arrival at that place, our v omen- 
slaves being busied in their ordinary employments of washing 
dishes, sewing, drawing water out of wells, which we had made 
on the shore, and the like things, we heard great cries of one 
of them, who said she had seen a troop of Indians appear 
towards the woods, whereby she began immediately to cry 
out : Indians ! Indians ! We, hearing this rumour, ran 
presently to our arms, and their relief. But, coming unto the 
wood, we found no person there excepting two of our women- 
slaves killed upon the place, with the shot of arrows. In 
their bodies we saw so many arrows sticking as might seem 
they had been fixed there with particular care and leisure, 
for otherwise we knew that one of them alone was sufficient 
to bereave any human body of life. These arrows were all 

D ^^B 

rTTTTTTminnnn C \Sq^ 



^mmm 



A. A marcasite^, which was tied unto the extremity of the arrow 

B. A hook, tied to the same extremity 

C. The arrow 

D. The case, at the other end 

of a rare fashion and shape, their length being eight feet, 
and their thickness of a man's thumb. At one of the extremi- 
ties hereof was to be seen a hook made of wood and tied to 
the body of the arrow with a string. At the other end was a 
certain case, or box, like the case of a pair of tweezers, in the 
which we found certain little pebbles, or stones. The colour 
thereof was red, and very shining, as if they had been locked 
up some considerable time. All which, we believed were arms 
belonging to their captains and leaders. 

These arrows were all made without instruments of iron. 
For, whatsoever the Indians make, they harden it first very 
artificially with fire, and afterwards polish it with flints. 

As to the nature of these Indians, they are extremely 

^ An obsolete name for certain crystalized forms of iron pyrites' 
Cf. Hakluyt, Voyages [1600], vol. iii, p. 575 : "We found a mine of 
marcazites, which glister like golde (but all is not gold that glistereth).' 
Sometimes called the " fire-stone " (v. Cotgrave, Dictionary [161 1]). 



2 32 INDIAN ARROWS 

robust of constitution, strong and nimble at their feet. We 
sought them carefully up and down the woods, but could 
not find the least trace of them, neither any of their canoes, 
nor floats, whereof they make use to go out to fish. Hereupon 
we retired unto our vessels, where, having embarked all our 
goods, we put off from the shore, fearing lest finding us there 
they should return in any considerable number, and over- 
powering our forces tear us all in pieces. 



CHAPTER VIII 

The author departs towards the Cape of Gracias d Dios, Of the 
commerce which here the Pirates exercise with the Indians. 
His arrival at the island De los Pinos ; and, finally, his 
return unto Jamaica 

The fear we had, more than usual, of those Indians above- 
mentioned, by reason of the death of our two women-slaves, 
of which we told you in the former chapter, occasioned us 
to depart as fast as we could from that place. We directed 
our course thence towards the Cape of Gracias d Dios, where 
we had fixed our last hopes of finding provisions. For thither 
do usually resort many Pirates, who entertain a friendly 
correspondence and trade with the Indians of those parts. 
Being arrived at the said cape, we hugely rejoiced, and gave 
thanks unto God Almighty, for having delivered us out of 
so many dangers and brought us unto this place of refuge, 
where we found people who showed us most cordial friendship, 
and provided us with all necessaries whatsoever. 

The custom of this island is such that, when any Pirates 
arrive there, every one has the liberty to buy for himself an 
Indian woman, at the price of a knife or any old axe, wood-bill, 
or hatchet. By this contract the woman is obliged to remain 
in the custody of the Pirate all the time he stays there. She 
serves him in the meanwhile, and brings him victuals of all 
sorts that the country affords. The Pirate, moreover, has 
liberty to go when he pleases, either to hunt, or fish, or about 
any other divertisements of his pleasure ; but withal is not 
to commit any hostility, or depredation upon the inhabitants, 
seeing the Indians bring him in all that he stands in need of, 
or that he desires. 

Through the frequent converse and familiarity these Indians 
have with the Pirates, they sometimes use to go to sea with 

233 



2 34 INDIANS OF GRACIAS A DIOS 

them, and remain among them for whole years, without re- 
turning home. Whence it comes that many of them can speak 
Enghsh and French, and some of the Pirates their Indian 
language. They are very dexterous at darting with the 
javelin, whereby they are very useful to the Pirates towards 
the victualling their ships, by the fishery of tortoises, and 
manitas, a sort of fish so called by the Spaniards. For one of 
these Indians is alone sufficient to victual a vessel of an 
hundred persons. We had among our crew two Pirates who 
could speak very well the Indian language. By the help of 
these men I was so curious [as] to inquire into their customs, 
lives, and policy, whereof I shall give you here a biief account. 
This island contains about thirty leagues in circumference, 
more or less. It is governed after the form of a little common- 
wealth, they having no king nor sovereign-prince among them. 
Neither do they entertain any friendship or correspondence 
with other neighbouring islands, much less with the Spaniards. 
They are in all but a small nation, whose number does not 
exceed sixteen or seventeen hundred persons. They have 
among them some few negroes, who serve them in quality 
of slaves. These happened to arrive there, swimming, after 
shipwreck made upon that coast. For, being bound for Terra 
Firma in a ship that carried them to be sold in those parts, 
they killed the Captain and mariners, with design to return 
unto their country. But, through their ignorance in marinery, 
they stranded their vessel hereabouts. Although, as I said 
before, they make but a small nation, yet they live divided, 
as it were, into two several provinces. Of these, the one sort 
employ themselves in cultivating the ground and making 
several plantations ; but the others are so lazy that they have 
not courage to build themselves huts, much less houses, to 
dwell in. They frequent chiefly the sea-coast, wandering 
disorderly up and down, without knowing or caring so much 
as to cover their bodies from the rains, which are very frequent 
in those parts, unless it be with a few palm-leaves. These 
they put upon their heads, and keep their backs always turned 
to the wind that blows. They use no other clothes than an 
apron, which being tied to their middle, cometh down so far 
as to hide the shameful parts of their bodies. Such aprons 
are made of the rinds of trees, which they strongly beat upon 
stones till they are softened. Of these same they make use 



INDIANS OF GRACIAS A DIGS 235 

for bed-clothes, to cover themselves when they sleep. Some 
make to themselves bed-clothes of cotton, but these are but 
few in number. Their usual arms are nothing but azagayas, 
or spears, which they make fit for their use with points of 
iron or teeth of crocodiles. 

They know, after some manner, that there is a God, yet they 
live without any reHgion or divine worship. Yea, as far as 
I can learn, they believe not in nor serve the devil, as many 
other nations of America do both believe, invoke, and worship 
him. Hereby they are not so much tormented by him as other 
nations are. Their ordinary food, for the greatest part, con- 
sists in several fruits, such as are called bananas, racoven, 
ananas, potatoes, cassava ; as also crabs, and some few fish 
of other sorts, which they kill in the sea with darts. As to 
their drink, they are something expert in making certain 
pleasant and delicate Hquors. The commonest among them 
is called achioc. This is made of a certain seed of palm-tree, 
which they bruise and afterwards steep or infuse in hot water, 
till it be settled at the bottom. This liquor, being strained off, 
has a very pleasant taste, and is very nourishing. Many other 
sorts of Hquors they prepare, which I shall omit for brevity. 
Only I shall say something, in short, of that which is made 
of plantanos. These they knead betwixt their hands with 
hot water, and afterwards put into great calabashes, which 
they fill up with cold water, and leave in repose for the space 
of eight days, during which time it ferments as well as the 
best sort of wine. This liquor they drink for pleasure, and as 
a great regale[ment], in so much that, when these Indians 
invite their friends or relations, they cannot treat them 
better than to give them some of this pleasant drink. 

They are very unskilful in dressing of victuals ; and hence 
it is that they very seldom treat one another with banquets. 
For this purpose, when they go or send to any house to invite 
others, they desire them to come and drink of their liquors. 
Before the invited persons come to their house, those that 
expect them comb their hair very well, and anoint their faces 
with oil of palm mingled with a certain black tincture, which 
renders them very hideous. The women, in Hke manner, 
daub their faces with another sort of stuff, which causes them 
to look as red as crimson. And such are the greatest civiUties 
thev use in their ornaments and attire. Afterwards, he that 



236 INDIAN SOCIAL CUSTOMS 

invites the other takes his arms, which are three or four 
azagayas, and goes out of his cottage the space of three or 
four hundred steps, to wait for and receive the persons that 
are to come to visit him. As soon as they draw nigh unto him, 
he falls down upon the ground, lying flat on his face, in which 
posture he remains without any motion, as if he were dead. 
Being thus prostrate before them, the invited friends take 
him up and set him on his feet, and thus they go altogether 
unto the hut. Here the persons who are invited use the 
same ceremony, falhng down on the ground, as the inviter 
did before. But he lifts them up one bj^ one, and, giving them 
his hand, cpnducts them into his cottage, where he causes 
them to sit. The women on these occasions perform few or 
no ceremonies. 

Being thus brought into the house, they are presented 
every one with a calabash full of the liquor above-mentioned, 
made of plantanos, which is very thick, almost like unto water- 
gruel, or children's pap, wherein is contained four quarts, 
more or less, of the said liquor. These they are to drink off 
as well as they can, and get down at any rate. The calabashes 
being emptied into their stomachs, the master of the house, 
with many ceremonies, goes about the room, and gathers 
his calabashes. And this drinking hitherto is reckoned but for 
one welcome, whereas every invitation ought to contain several 
welcomes. Afterwards, they begin to drink of the clear liquor 
above-mentioned, for which they were called to this treat. 
Hereunto follow many songs and dances and a thousand 
caresses to the women that are present : in so much that 
oftentimes, for a testimony of their great love unto them, they 
take their darts and with the points thereof pierce and wound 
their genital parts. This relation I confess I could not believe, 
though oftentimes it had been certified unto me, until such time 
as my own eyes were witnesses unto these and the like actions. 
Neither only on this occasion do they perform this ceremony 
of piercing their genitals, but also when they make love unto 
any woman, intending thereby to let them understand the 
greatness of their affection and constancy. 

They use not to marry any young maid without the consent 
of her parents. Hereupon, if any one desires to take a wife, 
he is first examined by the damsel's father concerning several 
points relating to good husbandry. These are most commonly : 



MARRIAGE AND BIRTH CUSTOMS 237 

whether he can make azagayas, darts for fishing, or spin a 
certain thread which they use about their arrows. Having 
answered to satisfaction, the examiner calls to his daughter, 
for a little calabash full of the liquor above-mentioned. Of 
this he drinks first ; then gives the cup unto the young man ; 
and he finally unto the bride, who drinks it up ; and with this 
only ceremony the marriage is made. When any one drinks 
to the health of another, the second person ought to drink up 
the liquor which the other person has left in the calabash. 
But, in case of marriage, as was said before, it is consumed 
alone among those three, the bride obtaining the greatest 
part to her share. 

When the woman lies in, neither she nor her husband 
observe the time, as is customary among the Caribbees. But, 
as soon as the woman is delivered, she goes instantly unto 
the next river, brook, or fountain, and washes the new-born 
creature, swaddling it up afterwards in certain rollers, or 
swaddling bands, which there are called cabalas. This being 
done, she goes about her ordinary labour, as before. At 
their entertainments it is usual that, when the man dies, his 
wife buries him with all his azagayas, aprons, and jewels 
that he used to wear at his ears. Her next obligation is to 
come every day to her husband's grave, bringing him meat 
and drink for a whole year together. Their years they reckon 
by the moons, allowing fifteen to every year, which make their 
entire circle, as our twelve months make ours. 

Some historians writing of the Caribbee Islands do afi&rm 
that this ceremony of carrying victuals to the dead is generally 
observed among them. Moreover, that the devil comes unto 
the sepulchres, and carries away all the meat and drink which 
is placed there. But I myself am not of this opinion, seeing 
I have oftentimes with my own hands taken away these 
offerings, and eaten them instead of other victuals. Unto this 
I was moved, because I knew that the fruits used on these 
occasions were the choicest and ripest of all others, as also 
the hquors of the best sort they made use of for their greatest 
regale[ment] and pleasure. When the widow has thus com- 
pleted her year, she opens the grave, and takes out all her 
husband's bones. These she scrapes and washes very well, and 
afterwards dries against the beams of the sun. When they are 
sufficiently dried, she ties them all together, and puts them 



238 FISHING AND HUNTING 

into a cabala, being a certain pouch or satchel, and is obliged 
for another year to carry them upon her back in the daytime, 
and to sleep upon them in the night, until the year be com- 
pletely expired. This ceremony being finished, she hangs up 
the bag and bones against the post of her own door, in case 
she be mistress of any house. But, having no house of her own, 
she hangs them at the door of her next neighbour or relation. 

The widows cannot marry a second time, according to the 
laws or customs of this nation, until the whole space of the two 
years above-mentioned be completed. The men are bound 
to perform no such ceremonies towards their wives. But, 
if any Pirate marries an Indian Woman, she is bound to do 
with him in all things as if he were an Indian man born. Then 
negroes that are upon this island live here in all respects 
according to the customs of their own country. All these 
things I have thought fit to take notice of in this place, though 
briefly, as judging them worthy the curiosity of some judicious 
and inquisitive persons. Now I shall continue the account 
of our voyage. 

After that we had refreshed and provided ourselves, as 
well as we could, at the island aforesaid, we departed thence, 
and steered our course towards the island De los Pinos. 
Here we arrived in fifteen days, and were constrained to refit 
again our vessel, which now the second time was very leaky 
and not fit for sailing any farther. Hereupon we divided our- 
selves, as before, and some went about that work of careening 
the ship, while others betook themselves to fishing. In this 
last we were so successful as to take in six or seven hours as 
much fish as would abundantly suffice to feed a thousand per- 
sons. We had in our company some Indians from the cape of 
Gracias a Dios, who were very dexterous both in hunting and 
fishing. With the help of these men we killed likewise in a 
short while and salted a huge number of wild-cows, sufficient 
both to satiate our hungry appetites and to victual our vessel 
for the sea. These cows were formerly brought into this 
island by the Spaniards, with design they should here mul- 
tiply and stock the country with cattle of this kind. We 
salted in like manner a vast number of tortoises, whereof in this 
island huge quantities are to be found. With these things 
our former cares and troubles began to dissipate, and our minds 
to be so far recreated as to forget the m' series we had lately 



FIGHT WITH A CROCODILE 239 

endured. Hereupon we began to call one another again by the 
name of brothers, which was customary amongst us, but had 
been disused in our miseries and scarce remembered without 
regret. 

All the time we continued here, we feasted ourselves very 
plentifully, without the least fear of enemies. For as to the 
Spaniards that were upon the island, they were here in mutual 
league and friendship with us. Thus we were only constrained 
to keep watch and ward every night, for fear of the crocodiles, 
which are here in great plenty all over the island. For these, 
when they are hungry, will assault any man whatsoever and 
devour him, as it happened in this conjuncture to one of our 
companions. This man being gone into the wood in company 
with a negro, they fell into a place where a crocodile lay con- 
cealed. The furious animal with incredible agility assaulted the 
Pirate, and, fastening upon his leg, cast him upon the ground, 
the negro being fled who should assist him. Yet he, notwith- 
standing, being a robust and courageous man, drew forth 
a knife he had then about him, and with the same, after a 
dangerous combat, overcame and killed the crocodile. Which 
having done, he himself, both tired with the battle and weakened 
with the loss of blood that ran from his wounds, lay for 
dead upon the place, or at least beside his senses. Being found 
in this posture some while after by the negro, who returned 
to see what was become of his master, he took him upon his 
back and brought him to the sea-side, distant thence the space 
of a whole league. Here we received him into a canoe, and 
conveyed him on board our ship. 

After this misfortune none of our men dared be so bold 
as to enter the woods without good company. Yea, we our- 
selves, desirous to revenge the disaster of our companion, 
went in troops the next day to the woods, with design to find 
out crocodiles to kill. These animals would usually come every 
night to the sides of our ship and make resemblance of climbing 
up into the vessel. One of these, on a certain night, we seized 
with an iron hook, but he, instead of flying to the bottom, 
began to mount the ladder of the ship, till we killed him with 
other instruments. Thus, after we had remained there some 
considerable time and refitted ourselves with all things neces- 
sary, we set sail thence for Jamaica. Here we arrived within 
few days, after a prosperous voyage, and found Captain 



240 RECALL OF GOVERNOR OF JAMAICA 

Morgan, who was got home before us, but had seen as yet 
none of his companions whom he left behind, we being the 
first that arrived there after him. 

The said Captain at that present was very busy, endeavour- 
ing to persuade and levy people to transport unto the isle of 
St Catharine, which he designed to fortify and hold as his own, 
thinking to make it a common refuge unto all sorts of Pirates, 
or at least of his own nation, as was said before. But he was 
soon hindered in the prosecution of this design by the arrival 
of a man-of-war from England. For this vessel brought orders 
from his Majesty of Great Britain, to recall the Governor of 
Jamaica from his charge over that island, unto the Court of 
England, there to give an account of his proceedings and 
behaviour in relation to the Pirates whom he had maintained 
in those parts, to the huge detriment of the subjects of the 
King of Spain. Unto this purpose the said man-of-war brought 
over also a new Governor of Jamaica, to supply the place of 
the preceding. This gentleman, being possessed of the govern- 
ment of the island, presently after gave notice unto all the ports 
thereof, by several boats which he sent forth to that intent, 
of the good and entire correspondence which his master the 
King of England designed henceforwards to maintain in those 
Western parts of the world towards his Catholic Majesty 
and all his subjects and dominions. And that unto this effect, 
for the time to come, he had received from his Sacred Majesty 
and Privy Council strict and severe orders not to permit any 
Pirate whatsoever to set forth from Jamaica, to commit 
any hostility or depredation upon the Spanish nation or 
dominions, or any other people of those neighbouring islands. 

No sooner these orders were sufficiently divulged but the 
Pirates, who as yet were abroad at sea, began to fear them, 
insomuch that they dared not return home unto the said 
island. Hereupon they kept the seas as long as they could, 
and continued to act as many hostilities as came in their way. 
Not long after, the same Pirates took and ransacked a con- 
siderable town, seated in the isle of Cuba, called La V ilia de 
los Cayos, of which we made mention in the description of 
the said island. Here they committed again all sorts of hos- 
tihty and inhuman and barbarous cruelties. But the new 
Governor of Jamaica behaved himself so constant to his duty, 
and the orders he had brought from England, that he appre- 



SOME ENGLISH PIRATES HANGED 241 

hended several of the chief actors herein, and condemned 
them to be hanged, which was accordingly done. From this 
severity many others still remaining abroad took warning, 
and retired to the isle of Tortuga, lest they should fall into 
his hands. Here they joined in society with the French 
Pirates, inhabitants of the said island, in whose company they 
continue to this day. 



CHAPTER IX 

The relation of the shipwreck which Monsieur Bertram Ogeron, 
Governor of the isle of Tortuga, suffered near the Isles of 
Guadanillas. How both he and his companions fell into the 
hands of the Spaniards. By what arts he escaped their hands, 
and preserved his life. The enterprise which he undertook 
against Porto Rico to deliver his people. The unfortunate 
success of that design 

After the expedition of Panama above-mentioned, the 
inhabitants of the French islands in America, in the year 
1673 (while the war was so fierce in Europe between France 
and Holland) , gathered a considerable fleet, for to go and possess 
themselves of the islands belonging to the States-General 
of the United Provinces in the West Indies. Unto this effect 
their admiral called together and levied all the Pirates and 
volunteers that would, by any inductions whatsoever, sit 
down under his colours. With the same design the Governor 
of Tortuga caused to be built in that island a good 
strong man-of-war, unto which vessel he gave the name of 
Ogeron. This ship he provided very well with all sorts of 
ammunition, and manned with five-hundred buccaneers, 
all resolute and courageous men, as being the vessel he de 
signed for his own safety. Their first intention was to go and 
take the isle of Curasao, belonging to the said States of 
Holland. But this design met with very ill success, by reason 
of a shipwreck, which impeded the course of their voyage. 

Monsieur Ogeron set sail from the port of Tortuga as soon 
as all things were in readiness, with intent to join the rest 
of the said fleet and pursue the enterprize aforementioned. 
Being arrived on the West side of the Island of St John de 
Puerto Rico, he was suddenly surprized with a violent storm. 
This increased to that a degree as caused his new frigate to 

242 



\ ^ BERTRAM OGERON WRECKED 243 

strike against the rocks that neighbour upon the islands, 
called Guadanillas, where the vessel broke into a thousand 
pieces. Yet, being nigh unto the land of Porto Rico, all his 
men escaped, by saving their lives in boats, which they had at 
hand. 

The next day, all being now got on shore, they were dis- 
covered by the Spaniards who inhabit the island. These 
instantly took them to be French Pirates, whose intent was 
to take the said island anew, as they had done several times 
before. Hereupon they alarmed the whole country, and, 
gathering their forces together, marched out to their encounter. 
But they found them unprovided of all manner of arms, and 
consequently not able to make any defence, craving for mercy 
at their hands, and begging quarter for their lives, as the cus- 
tom is. Yet notwithstanding, the Spaniards, remembering 
the horrible and cruel actions those Pirates had many times 
committed against them, would have no compassion on their 
condition. But, answering them : Ha ! ye thievish dogs, 
here's no quarter for you ! they assaulted them with all fury 
imaginable, and killed the greatest part of the company. 
At last, perceiving they made no resistance nor had any arms 
to defend themselves, they began to relent in their cruelty, 
and stay their blows, taking prisoners as many as remained 
aUve. Yet still they would not be persuaded but that those 
unfortunate people were come thither with design to take 
again and ruin the island. 

Hereupon they bound them with cords, by two and two or 
three and three together, and drove them through the woods 
into the campaign, or open fields. Being come thus far with 
them, they asked them : What was become of their captain 
and leader? Unto these questions they constantly made 
answer : He was drowned in the shipwreck at sea ; although 
they knew full well it was false. For Monsieur Ogeron, being 
unknown unto the Spaniards, behaved himself among them 
as if he were a fool and had no common use of reason. Not- 
withstanding, the Spaniards, scarce believing what the 
prisoners had answered, used all the means they could possibly 
to find him, but could not compass their desires. For Mon- 
sieur Ogeron kept himself very close to all the features and 
mimical actions that might become any innocent fool. Upon 
this account he was not tied as the rest of his companions, 



244 OGERON AND SURGEON ESCAPE 

but let loose, to serve the divertisement and laughter of the 
common soldiers. These now and then would give him scraps 
of bread and other victuals, whereas the rest of the prisoners 
had never sufficient wherewith to satisfy their hungry- 
stomachs. For, as to the allowance they had from the 
Spaniards, their enemies, it was scarce enough to preserve 
them alive. 

It happened there was found among the French Pirates 
a certain surgeon, who had done some remarkable services 
to the Spaniards. In consideration of these merits, he was 
unbound and set at liberty, to go freely up and down, even 
as Monsieur Ogeron did. Unto this surgeon Monsieur Ogeron, 
having a fit opportunity thereunto, declared his resolution 
of hazarding his life to attempt an escape from the cruelty 
and hard usage of those enemies. After mature deliberation, 
they both performed it, by flying unto the woods, with design 
there to make something or other that might be navigable, 
whereby to transport themselves elsewhere ; although unto 
this effect they had nor could obtain no other thing in the world 
that could be serviceable in building of vessels but one only 
hatchet. Thus they joined company, and began their march 
towards the woods that lay nearest the sea-coast. Having 
travelled all day long, they came about evening unto the 
sea-side almost unexpectedly. Here they found themselves 
without anything to eat, nor any secure place wherein to 
rest their wearied Hmbs. At last they perceived nigh the shore 
an huge quantity of fishes, called by the Spaniards corlabados. 
These frequently approach the sands of the shore in pursuit 
of other little fishes that serve them for their food. Of these 
they took as many as they thought necessary, and, by rubbing 
two sticks tediously together, they kindled fire, wherewith 
they made coals to roast them. The next day they began to 
cut down and prepare timber, wherewith to make a kind of 
small boat, in which they might pass over unto the isle of 
Santa Cruz, which belongs to the French. 

While they were busied about their work, they discovered, 
at a great distance, a certain canoe, which steered directly 
towards the place where they were. This occasioned in their 
minds some fears lest they should be found, and taken again 
by the Spaniards ; and hereupon they retired into the woods 
till such time as they could see thence and distinguish what 



THEY REACH SAMANA 245 

people were in the canoe. But at last, as their good fortune 
would have it, they perceived them to be no more than two 
men, who in their disposition and apparel seemed to be fisher- 
men. Having made this discovery, they concluded unani- 
mously betwixt themselves to hazard their lives, and overcome 
them, and afterwards seize the canoe. Soon after they per- 
ceived one of them, who was a mulatto, to go with several 
calabashes hanging at his back towards a spring, not far distant 
from the shore, to take in fresh water. The other, who was 
a Spaniard, remained behind, waiting for his return. Seeing 
them divided, they assaulted the mulatto first, and discharging 
a great blow on his head with the hatchet, they soon bereaved 
him of hfe. The Spaniard, hearing the noise, made instantly 
towards the canoe, thinking to escape. But this he could not 
perform so soon, without being overtaken by the two, and 
there massacred by their hands. Having now compassed 
their design, they went to seek for the corpse of the mulatto, 
which they carried on board the canoe. Their intent was to 
convey them into the middle of the sea, and there cast 
them overboard, to be consumed by the fish, and by this means 
conceal this fact from being known unto the Spaniards, either 
at a short or long distance of time. 

These things being done, they took in presently as much 
fresh water as they could, and set sail to seek thence some 
place of refuge. That day they steered along the coast of 
Porto Rico, and came unto the cape called by the Spaniards 
Cabo Roxo. Hence they traversed directly to the isle of 
Hispaniola, where so many of their own comrades and com- 
panions were to be found. Both the currents of the waters 
and winds were very favourable unto this voyage, in so much 
that in a few days they arrived at a place called Samana, 
belonging to the said island, where they found a party of their 
own people. 

Monsieur Ogeron, being landed at Samana, gave orders 
unto the surgeon to levy all the people he could possibly in 
those parts, while he departed to revisit his government of 
Tortuga. Being arrived at the said port, he used all his endea- 
vours to gather what vessels and men he could to his assist- 
ance ; so that within a few days he compassed a good number 
of both, very well equipped and disposed to follow and execute 
his designs. These were to go unto the island of St John de 



246 AMBUSHED BY THE SPANIARDS 

Puerto Rico, and deliver his fellow-prisoners whom he had 
left in the miserable condition as was said before. After 
having embarked all the people which the surgeon had levied 
at Samana, he made them a speech, exhorting them to have 
good courage, and telling them : You may all expect great 
spoil and riches from this enterprize, and therefore let all fear 
and cowardice he set on side. On the contrary, fill your hearts 
with courage and valour, for thus you will find yourselves soon 
satisfied of what, at present, hare hopes do promise. Every one 
relied much on these promises of Monsieur Ogeron, and, 
from his words, conceived no small joy in their minds. Thus 
they set sail from Tortuga, steering their course directly for 
the coasts of Porto Rico. Being come within sight of land, 
they made use only of their lower sails, to the intent they 
might not be discovered at so great a distance by the Spaniards, 
till they came somewhat near the place where they intended 
to land. 

The Spaniards, notwithstanding this caution, had intelli- 
gence beforehand of their coming, and were prepared for a 
defence, having posted many troops of horse all along the 
coast, to watch the descent of the French Pirates. Monsieur 
Ogeron, perceiving their vigilance, gave order to the vessels 
to draw nigh unto the shore and shoot off many great guns, 
whereby he forced the cavalry to retire unto places more 
secure within the woods. Here lay concealed many companies 
of foot, who had prostrated themselves upon the ground. 
Meanwhile the Pirates made their descent at leisure, and began 
to enter among the trees, scarce suspecting any harm to be 
there, where the horsemen could do no service. But no sooner 
were they fallen into this ambuscade than the Spaniards 
arose with great fury, and assaulted the French so courageously 
that in a short while they destroyed great part of them. 
And, thus leaving great numbers of dead on the place, the rest 
with difficulty escaped by retreating in all haste unto their 
ships. 

Monsieur Ogeron, although he escaped this danger, yet 
could willingly have perished in the fight rather than suffer 
the shame and confusion the unfortunate success of this 
enterprize was likely to bring upon his reputation, especially 
considering that those whom he had attempted to set at 
liberty were now cast into greater miseries through this mis- 



BRUTALITY TO FRENCH PRISONERS 247 

fortune. Hereupon they hastened to set sail, and go back 
unto Tortuga the same way they came, with great confusion 
in their minds, much diminished in their number, and nothing 
laden with those spoils the hopes whereof had possessed their 
hearts and caused them readily to follow the promises of 
unfortunate Monsieur Ogeron. The Spaniards were very 
vigilant, and kept their posts nigh unto the sea-side till such 
time as the fleet of Pirates was totally out of sight. In the 
meanwhile they made an end of kiUing such of their enemies 
as being desperately wounded could not escape by flight. 
In like manner they cut off several limbs from the dead bodies, 
with design to show them to the former prisoners, for whose 
redemption these others had crossed the seas. 
. The fleet, being departed, the Spaniards kindled bonfires 
all over the island, and made great demonstrations of joy for 
the victory they had obtained. But the French prisoners 
who were there before had more hardship showed them from 
that day than ever. Of their misery and misusage was a good 
eye-witness, Jacob Binkes, Governor at that time in America 
for the States-General of the United Provinces. For he hap- 
pened to arrive in that conjuncture at the island of Porto 
Rico, with some men-of-war, to buy provisions and other 
necessaries for his fleet. His compassion on their misery was 
such as caused him to bring away by stealth five or six of the 
said prisoners, which served only to exasperate the minds of 
the Spaniards. For soon after they sent the rest of the 
prisoners to the chief city of the island, there to work and toil 
about the fortifications which then were making, forcing them 
to bring and carry stones and all sorts of materials belonging 
thereunto. These being finished, the Governor transported 
them unto Havana, where they employed them in like manner, 
in fortifying that city. Here they caused them to work in the 
day-time, and by night they shut them up as close prisoners, 
fearing lest they should enterprize upon the city. For of such 
attempts the Spaniards had had divers proofs on other occa- 
sions, which afforded them sufficient cause to use them after 
that manner. 

Afterwards at several times, wherein ships arrived there 
from New Spain, they transported them by degrees into 
Europe, and landed them at the city of Cadiz. But notwith- 
standing this care of the Spaniards to disperse them, they soon 



248 LE SIEUR MAINTENON 

after met almost all together in France, and resolved among 
themselves to return again unto Tortuga with the first oppor- 
tunity [that] should proffer. To this effect, they assisted one 
another very lovingly with what necessaries they could spare, 
according to every one's condition ; so that in a short while 
the greatest part of those Pirates had nested themselves again 
at Tortuga, their common place of rendezvous. Here, some 
time after, they equipped again a new fleet, to revenge their 
former misfortunes on the Spaniards, under the conduct of 
one Le Sieur Maintenon, a Frenchman by nation. With this 
fleet he arrived at the island of Trinidad, situated between 
the isle of Tobago and the neighbouring coasts of Paria. 
This island they sacked, and afterwards put to the ransom 
of 10,000 pieces-of-eight. Hence they departed, with design 
to take and pillage the city of Caracas, seated over against 
the island of Curasao, belonging to the Hollanders. 



CHAPTER X 

A relation of what encounters lately happened at the islands of 
Cay ana and Tobago between the Count de Estres, Admiral 
of France, in America, and the Heer facob Binkes, Vice- 
Admiral of the United Provinces, in the same parts 

It is a thing already known unto the greatest part of Europe 
that the Prince of Courland began to estabUsh a colony in 
the island of Tobago ; as, also, that, somewhile after, his 
people, for want of timely recruits from their own country, 
abandoned the said island, leaving it to the first that should 
come and possess it. Thus it fell into the hands of the Heers 
Adrian and Cornelius Lampsius, natives of the city of Flushing, 
in the province of Zeeland. For, being arrived at the said 
island of Tobago, in the year 1654, they undertook to fortify 
it by command of their sovereigns, the States-General. Here- 
upon they built a goodly castle, in a convenient situation, 
capable of hindering the assaults of any enemies that might 
enterprize upon the island. 

The strength of this castle was afterwards sufficiently tried by 
Monsieur de Estres, as I shall presently relate, after I have first 
told you what happened before at Cayana in the year 1676. 
This year the States-General of the United Provinces sent 
their Vice-Admiral, Jacob Binkes, unto the island of Cayana, 
then in possession of the French, for to retake the said island, 
and hereby restore it unto the dominions of the United Pro- 
vinces aforementioned. With these orders he set forth from 
Holland on the i6th day of March in the said year, his fleet 
consisting of seven men-of-war, one fireship, and five other 
small vessels of less account. This fleet arrived at Cayana 
the 4th day of the month of May next following. Immediately 
after their arrival, the Heer Binkes landed nine-hundred men, 
who, approaching the castle, summoned the Governor to 

349 



ISO COUNT DE ESTRES' MISSION 

surrender at their discretion. His answer was : He thought 
of nothing less than surrendering, hut that he and his people 
were resolved to defend themselves, even to the utmost of their 
endeavours. The Heer Binkes, having received this answer, 
presently commanded his troops to attack the castle on both 
sides at once. The assault was very furious. But at length 
the French, being few in number and overwhelmed with the 
multitude of their enemies, surrendered both their arms and 
the castle. In it were found thirty-seven pieces of cannon. 
The Governor, who was named Monsieur Lesi, together with 
two priests were sent into Holland. The Heer Binkes lost in 
the combat 14 men only, and had 72 wounded. 

The King of France no sooner understood this success but 
he sent in the month of October following the Count de Estres, 
for to retake the said island again from the Hollanders. He 
arrived there in the month of December with a squadron of 
men-of-war, all very well equipped and provided. Being come 
on his voyage as far as the river called Aperovaco, he met there 
with a small vessel of Nantes, which had set forth from the 
said island of Cayana but a fortnight before. This ship gave 
him intelhgence of the present state and condition wherein 
he might be certain to find the Hollanders at Cayana. They 
told him there were 300 men in the castle ; that all about it 
they had fixed strong palisades, or empalements ; and that 
within the castle were mounted 26 pieces of cannon. 

Monsieur de Estres, being enabled with this intelligence to 
take his own measures, proceeded on his voyage, and arrived 
at a port of the said island 3 leagues distant from the castle. 
Here he landed 800 men, whom he divided into two several 
parties. The one he placed under the conduct of the Count 
de Blinac, and the other he gave unto Monsieur de St Faucher. 
On board the fleet he left Monsieur Cabaret, with divers other 
principal troops which he thought not fit or necessary to be 
landed. As soon as the men were set on shore, the fleet weighed 
anchor, and sailed very slowly towards the castle, while the 
soldiers marched by land. These could not travel otherwise 
than by night by reason of the excessive heat of the sun 
and intolerable exhalations of the earth, which here is very 
sulphurous, and consequently no better than a smoky and 
stinking oven. 

On the 19th day of the said month the Count de Estres 



ENGAGEMENT WITH DUTCH FLEET 251 

sent Monsieur de Lesi (who had been Governor of the island, 
as was said before), demanding of them, to deUver the castle 
unto the obedience of the King, his master, and to him in his 
sovereign's name. But those who were within resolved not 
to deliver themselves up but at the expense of their lives and 
blood, which answer they sent unto Monsieur de Estres. 
Hereupon the French, the following night, assaulted and 
stormed the castle on seven several sides thereof all at once. 
The defendants, having performed their obligation very stoutly, 
and fought with as much valour as was possible, were at 
last forced to surrender. Within the castle were found 38 
persons dead, besides many others that were wounded. All 
the prisoners were transported into France, where they were 
used with great hardship. 

Monsieur de Estres, having put all things in good order at 
the isle of Cayana, departed thence for that of Martinique. 
Being arrived at the said island, he was told that the Heer 
Binkes was at that present at the island of Tobago and his 
fleet lay at anchor in the bay. Having received this intelh- 
gence, Monsieur de Estres made no long stay there, but set 
sail again, steering his course directly for Tobago. No sooner 
was he come nigh unto the island but Vice-Admiral Binkes 
sent his land-forces, together with a good number of mariners, 
on shore, to manage and defend the artillery that was there. 
These forces were commanded by the Captains Van der Graef , 
Van Dongen and Ciavone, who laboured very hard all that 
night in raising certain batteries and filling up the palisades, 
or empalements, of the fortress called Sterreschans. 

Two days after, the French fleet came to an anchor in the Bay 
of Palmit, and immediately, with the help of eighteen boats, 
they landed all their men. The Heer Binkes, perceiving the 
French to appear upon the hills, gave orders to burn all the 
houses that were nigh unto the castle, to the intent the French 
might have no place to shelter themselves thereabouts. On 
the 23rd day of February Monsieur de Estres sent a drum over 
to the Hollanders to demand the surrender of the fort, which 
was absolutely denied. In this posture of affairs things con- 
tinued until the 3rd of March. On this day the French fleet 
came with full sail, and engaged the Dutch fleet. The Heer 
Binkes presently encountered them, and the dispute was very 
hot on both sides. In the meanwhile the land-forces belonging 



2 52 FRENCH ENTERPRIZE 

to the French, being sheltered by the thickness of the woods, 
advanced towards the castle, and began to storm it very 
briskly with more than ordinary force, but were repulsed by 
the Dutch with such vigour as caused them after three dis- 
tinct attacks to retire with the loss of. above 150 men, and 
200 wounded. These they carried off, or rather dragged away, 
with no small difficulty, by reason of their disorderly retreat. 

All this while the two fleets continued the combat, and 
fought very desperately, until that on both sides some ships 
were consumed between Vulcan and Neptune. Of this number 
was Monsieur de Estres' own ship, mounted with 27 guns of 
prodigious bigness, besides other pieces of lesser port. The 
battle continued from break of day until the evening ; a 
little before which time Monsieur de Estres quitted the bay 
with the rest of his ships, unto the Hollanders, excepting only 
two, which were stranded under sail, as having gone too high 
within the port. Finally the victory remained on the side 
of the Hollanders, howbeit with the loss of several of their 
ships that were burnt. 

Monsieur de Estres, finding himself under the shame of 
the loss of this victory, and that he could expect no advantage 
for that present over the island of Tobago, set sail from those 
quarters the i8th day of March, and arrived the 21st day of 
June next following at the port of Brest in France. Having 
given an account of these transactions to his most Christian 
Majesty, he was pleased to command him to undertake again 
the enterprize of Tobago. Unto this effect, he gave orders 
for eight great men-of-war to be equipped with all speed, 
together with eight others of smaller account : with all which 
vessels he sent again Monsieur de Estres into America the 
same year. He set sail from the said port of Brest on the 3rd 
day of October following, and arrived the ist of December at 
the island of Barbados. Afterwards, having received some 
recruits from the isle of Martinique, he sent beforehand to 
review the island of Tobago, and consider the condition there- 
of. This being done, he weighed anchor and set sail directly 
for the said island, where he arrived the 7th day of the said 
month of December with all his fleet. 

Immediately after his arrival he landed 500 men, under the 
conduct of Monsieur de Blinac, Governor of the French islands 
in America. These were followed soon after by 1000 more. 



FRENCH RETAKE TOBAGO 253 

The 9th day of the said month they approached within 600. 
paces of a certain post called Le Cort, where they landed all 
the artillery designed for this enterprize. On the loth day 
Monsieur de Estres went in person to take a view of the castle, 
and demanded of the Heer Binkes, by a messenger, the sur- 
render thereof, which was generously denied. The next day 
the French began to advance towards the castle, and on the 
12th of the said month the Dutch from within began to fire 
at them with great perseverance. The French made a begin- 
ning to their attack by casting fire-balls into the castle with 
main violence. The very third ball that was cast in happened 
to fall in the path-way that led to the storehouse where the 
powder and ammunition was kept belonging to the castle. 
In this path was much powder scattered up and down, through 
the negligence of those that carried it to and fro for the neces- 
sary supplies of the defendants. By this means the powder 
took fire in the path, and thence ran in a moment as far as 
the storehouse above-mentioned ; so that suddenly both the 
storehouse was blown up, and with it Vice-Admiral Binkes 
himself, then Governor of the island, and all his officers. 
Only Captain Van Dongen remained alive. This mischance 
being perceived by the French, they instantly ran with 500 
men, and possessed themselves of the castle. Here they 
found 300 men alive, whom they took prisoners and trans- 
ported into France. Monsieur de Estres after this com- 
manded the castle to be demolished, together with other 
posts that might serve for any defence, as also all the houses 
standing upon the island. This being done, he departed 
thence the 27th day of the said month of December, and 
arrived again in France after a prosperous voyage. 



CHAPTER XI 

Adventures of Captain Cook, in the year 1678. He is taken by 
the Spaniards. Bold exploits, and revenge of his losses, 
performed by some few Buccaneers that were on board his 
ship 

In the year 1678 Captain Cook, who followed the trade of 
the West Indies and our several plantations there, happened 
to go into the Bay of Campeche, there to load his vessel with 
logwood, as many others had done before. The forests about 
Campeche are a certain place adjoining to the Bay of Mexico, 
unto which for many years the Buccaneers have usually 
resorted to cut wood for the art of dyeing, and prepare hides 
for shoe-leather, and other uses, towards the lading of several 
ships that from all parts frequent the forementioned Bay, to 
trade with them. After he had taken in his lading, having 
also some of the Buccaneers aboard his vessel, he set sail for 
the island of Tobago, at which place he was to deliver his 
cargo ; but his fortune was to fall somewhat short, or leeward, 
in the phrase of the mariners, of his desired and intended port. 
Hereupon he came to anchor at the West end of a certain 
island called Rubia, whereof mention has been already made 
in the preceding history of the Buccaneers. 

Here Captain Cook had not lain long at anchor, expecting 
a wind for the prosecution of his voyage, when he was unex- 
pectedly surprized and taken by three Spanish men-of-war. 
These, having possessed themselves of his ship and cargo, 
presently after set both him and his companions ashore 
upon the aforesaid island. Here therefore being landed, they 
found a Dutch Governor or officer, with six men in his retinue, 
who were only settled there to purchase provisions for their 
vessels that should happen to touch in those parts. 

254 



CAPTAIN COOK 255 

Our English had not been long on this island but there hap- 
pened to come into the road a Spanish boat, equipped with 
sixteen or eighteen men and laden with coconuts (whereof 
chocolate is made) and plate. The Buccaneers immediately 
put it into the thoughts of Captain Cook to make reprizal 
upon the countrymen of those who had so lately stripped them 
of all they had : he approving of their proposals, in order 
thereunto they acquainted the Governor's man with their 
intentions, and withal desired him, under promise of a good 
reward, to lend them a small number of fusees, or guns, where- 
with to put these their designs into execution. The Governor 
and his men, hearing the promise of so great a reward, were 
easily persuaded to accommodate them with arms at their 
request : six men, therefore, of the Buccaneers, being thus 
resolved and fitted with arms, placed themselves in ambuscade 
about that part of the island where the boat of the Spanish 
sloop was to come ashore. The boat happening to land there- 
abouts in a small time after, as they desired, they immediately 
set upon the men, and took them prisoners. Having bound 
them fast upon the strand, they seized the boat and embarked 
therein with resolution to take the vessel it belonged unto, 
which they performed in this manner : two of them they 
appointed among themselves to row the boat ; two more 
to charge their guns ; and the remaining couple were to fire 
into the Spanish bark as briskly as they could pour in their 
shot. In this posture they rowed in the wake, under the stern 
of the said vessel. The Spaniards on board soon perceived 
they were not to expect their own men again but enemies in 
lieu of them. Therewith immediately they put themselves 
into the posture of defence, and began to handle their arm$. 
But this they performed so unfortunately on their side, or 
rather fortunately for the English, that the Buccaneers killed 
the padre, or priest, they had on board, and the Captain or 
Master of the vessel Ukewise ; whereupon the rest surrendered 
themselves by throwing their arms overboard and craving 
quarter for their Uves. Thus at the same time they made 
themselves masters of the vessel and restitution of their former 
losses. 

Here, in the first place, they gave the Dutch Governor out 
of their gains a considerable present ; and his chief man they 
rewarded very liberally for the loan of the arms aforemen- 



256 CAPTAIN COOK 

tioned. In the next, they assigned unto Captain Cook a valu- 
able consideration for his losses, and hkewise something unto 
each, and every one of the mariners that belonged to his ship. 
After which, the Buccaneers (for these were the chief, or 
rather only, men concerned in this attempt) divided among 
themselves nigh four-hundred pound to each, both in goods 
and plate. Thus they set sail from the isle of Rubia in the same 
Spanish bark they had taken, and arrived in few days after 
at Jamaica, where they took out her lading, and afterwards 
set fire unto the bottom, as being unfit for their purpose. 
Here they paid the Governor his duties, and embarked them- 
selves with their goods for England, where some of them live 
in good reputation unto this day. Yet their names are desired 
to be concealed in this place, this action resenting too much 
of self -justice, or petite piracy, which is a term they themselves 
have given unto it. 



CHAPTER XII 

^A brief account of Captain Sharp and other his companions ; 
their voyage from Jamaica unto the province of Darien and 
South Sea ; with the robberies and assaults they committed 
therefor the space of three years, till their return for England 
in the year 1682. Given by one of the Buccaneers who was 
present at those transactions 

We set sail from Port Royal, upon the island of Jamaica, 
in the year of our Lord 1679. Our fleet consisted of five sail 
of ships, whereof the chief Commanders were named Captain 
Coxon, Cornelius Essex, Robert AUison, John Rose, and 
Captain Sharp. The first port we went unto was Port Moranto. 
Hence we steered our course directly for the coast of Cartagena, 
or rather for the islands of Pines, commonly called De los 
Pinos, not far distant from that coast. At these islands we 
victualled our ships, as at other times has been done by other 
men of the like trade. But in this passage from Port Moranto 
unto the Pine Islands we had the misfortune to lose, by stress 
of weather, two of our number of vessels, to wit Captain Sharp 
and CorneHus Essex, who both separated from us in a storm. 
However, having taken in what provision of victuals we 
thought necessary, we steered thence towards the island 
called Fuerte, or Porta. Being upon this course about the 
middle of the islands called Zavallos, or ZambuUos, we hap- 
pened to meet with a French man-of-war, who was mounted 
with eight guns, and who kept in our company for some days. 
His commission was but for a small space of time — only for 
three months. We shewed him our commission, which was 
now for three years to come. This we had purchased at a 
cheap rate, having given for it only the sum of ten ducats, 
or pieces-of-eight. But the truth of the thing was that at 
first our commission was made only for the space of three 
s 257 



258 CAPTURE OF PORTO BELLO 

months, the same date as the Frenchman's was ; whereas 
among ourselves we had contrived to make it last for three 
years — for with this we were resolved to seek our fortunes. 

Having ranged for some while up and down the islands, 
which in those seas are pretty frequent, and finding nothing 
that could give us satisfaction, we at last resolved to attempt 
Porto Bello, which formerly had been taken and sacked by 
Sir Henry Morgan, and others, both English and French, 
hoping his fortune would favour our arms, and that we should 
bring away no less booty than he had done before. Unto 
this effect we thought it convenient to leave our ships at 
certain islands not far distant from Porto Bello, and put our 
men into fourteen or fifteen canoes, which we had taken for 
that purpose. With these we landed at a considerable distance 
from the town and port, and were constrained, after landing, 
to travel three whole nights before we could reach the place. 
By day we concealed ourselves in the woods and took our 
rest, for then we dared not to travel, fearing lest we should 
be discovered by the Spaniards, our mortal enemies, whom 
we intended to plunder : yet, notwithstanding, all the care 
we could possibly take, we were at last, before we came to 
the town, discovered by a negro, who ran before us unto the 
place and gave intelligence of our coming. Hereupon, per- 
ceiving we were descried, we hastened our march after his 
steps as fast as we could, and got into the town before he could 
raise the citizens or any considerable body of defence could 
be formed against us. Thus we possessed ourselves of the city 
without any considerable loss on our side, and plundered all 
we could find in the houses and elsewhere. Our stay here 
was but short, for fear lest the enemy should rally against 
us or pour in the country upon our small forces and thus 
intercept our retreat — especially as we had left our ships at 
the islands above-mentioned and were masters of only a few 
canoes to convey us over the seas unto them. Having been 
therefore in possession of the town the space of two days and 
two nights, we resolved to quit it and return unto our ships. 
We divided amongst us, out of the booty, about forty pound 
sterling to each man, beside what extraordinary shares 
were drawn by our officers, the owners of the vessels, carpen- 
ters, surgeons, and those who lost any limbs, or were killed 
in this expedition, according to the customary laws of the 



CAPTURE OF A PACKET-BOAT 259 

Buccaneers, which are described in the History of these people 
but lately printed. In this exploit of taking the town of Porto 
Bello our number was not above that of 200 men, the residue 
being left behind to man and defend our ships. Yet, notwith- 
standing, these who guarded the ships had their shares equally 
distributed unto them, as well as those who went on shore. 
In all our whole number might consist of 300 fighting-men, 
which we brought out from Jamaica with us — not many more, 
if I well remember : which point I forgot to tell you at the 
beginning of this relation. 

Being returned on board our ships, we cruized to and fro 
for some days, hoping to find some other purchase by sea, as 
we had done by land. But nothing could we meet withal 
that would stay our thirst and hunger after more prey : only, 
being upon a certain tack, we happened to meet with a Span- 
ish barco de avifo, or packet-boat, which was called St Rose, 
mounted only with six guns, and which was bound for Spain, 
or from there to the West Indies, with letters and intelligence 
concerning the galleons, or floia, and other State affairs, as 
they are usually sent every year by the CathoUc King unto his 
Viceroys, or Governors, in those parts, or else by them unto 
His Majesty, upon the aforesaid account. This little ship, 
therefore, we immediately set upon and took, but found not 
so much in her as would answer our expectations. Neither 
the letters they had on board could we reach, from which we 
might possibly have learned something which would have 
pleased our fancies or flattered our hopes for some while ; 
for the Spaniards cast them into the sea, when they saw them- 
selves in danger of being taken, before we could possess our- 
selves of the vessel ; which was done according to the strict 
and almost inviolable orders the Captains of these packet 
boats, or navios de avifo (for so they are also named), that is 
packet-ships, do constantly receive from the King of Spain ; 
unto which effect also they take an oath, viz. to cast their 
letters overboard, and not deliver them up to any enemy 
whatsoever. Conformable to this point, all the Captains of 
the galleons belonging likewise are solemnly sworn to sink, 
burn, or otherwise to destroy their ships rather than permit 
them to be taken by an enemy, for fear of enriching him not 
so much with those their great vessels as with the treasure 
they bring home. 



26o LANDING IN DARIEN 

After taking the packet-boat before-mentioned, perceiving 
our vessels to be foul, we steered our course for Boca del Toro, 
there to careen our ships. This place is already mentioned 
in the History of the Buccaneers, and is often frequented by 
Pirates for the same purpose. Here we met with Captain 
Peter Harris, in a Dutch ship of thirty-two guns, and also 
with Captain Richard Sawkins, who was in a small brigantine 
mounted with only four guns. Both these ships had put in 
there either to careen or refresh themselves with water and 
other provisions. 

Having cleansed and careened our bottoms to our satisfac- 
tion, we afterwards cruized again for some while, in hopes of 
finding some such purchase as we most desired. But, being frus- 
trated of our expectations, at last we resolved to quit again 
our ships and land on the coast of Darien, thinking there to 
find what we so long had sought for — or at least [to] plunder 
and pillage some towns belonging to that coast. This resolu- 
tion therefore we presently put in execution; and, standing 
over towards the land of Darien, we soon after went on shore 
there, and began to range up and down the woods, designing 
to take some prisoners who might serve us with intelligence 
and be our guides, as being totally ignorant of the country. 
Here we found an Indian that could speak Spanish, whom 
therefore we examined very strictly, where the gold and silver 
of that country did lie ; for we had heard that both these 
coveted metals were digged out or found in some parts of 
that province by the Spaniards. He told us that not far 
distant from there there was a place called Tocamora (for so 
it was named), which was the receptacle-town of all the gold 
that was found in those parts, saying often unto us in the 
Spanish language, and repeating these words, miicho oro ay 
en Tocamora, that is a great deal of gold lieth at Tocamora, and 
that he would guide us unto it. With these promises we were 
infinitely encouraged, and resolved not to return unto our ships 
until such time as we had made some considerable booty, at 
least sufficient for one voyage, to satisfy our earnest appetite 
for gold. We landed in Darien, according to what I can best 
remember, either about the latter end of March or the begin- 
ning of April, in the year 1680, when began the chiefest and 
hardest of our adventures both by land and sea — those I have 
rehearsed being only the preludiums of such as were to follow. 



COMPACT WITH INDIANS 261 

By the way, as we marched towards Tocamora under the 
conduct of our Indian, we took other prisoners, and learned 
from them other things. That the Indians of that country 
hated mortally the Spaniards and were at enmity with them : 
that they had a chief Captain, or leader, whom they styled 
Emperor, and who would be glad of our assistance against 
the Spaniards, by whom he had been much wronged, and was 
therefore with them in open and continual war. That, in 
recompense of our service, he would certainly lead us unto 
those places where most gold and silver was to be had, these 
being unjustly detailed from him, and where it was but fighting 
for it, and having more than we should be able to carry away. 
These allurements put our minds upon new designs, and were 
sufficient to entice us to present our auxiliary service unto the 
Emperor of that country, as judging it more convenient to 
be put in possession, or rather led unto those so vastly rich 
places, by the Emperor and the Indians themselves than to 
have both Indians and Spaniards all at once against us ; 
especially in a foreign country where we knew not one step 
of the way. 

Thus, after an intercourse of some few messengers who 
were sent to and fro, we came at last (not to be too tedious in 
the narrative) unto a view and amicable parley with the 
Emperor himself in person, who readily accepted of our ser- 
vice and promised himself great matters from our aid and 
assistance against the Spaniards. He failed not to promise 
us great heaps of gold, would we but fight courageously 
under his conduct, and regain those places from the Spaniards 
where they were most certainly to be found. These things 
we easily believed as feasible, and therefore as readily did 
embrace his propositions ; yet, should we fail of our designs, 
we had still other things under consideration, which might in 
great probability be as profitable and turn to the same account. 
The sum of these was to descend by the river of Darien, or 
any other, into the South Sea, and there to rove up and down 
until such time as we could meet any rich prize, or galleon 
coming from Lima to Panama, or else to plunder again either 
the city of Panama or any other of so many rich towns and 
villages are known to border upon the coasts of that sea. 
As for shipping, though we had it not at present, yet we feared 
not to obtain it by the help of those canoes we should employ 



262 SERVICE WITH INDIANS 

to carry us down the river. After which, we considered it 
would be no great difficulty to return homewards, either round 
about the Strait of Magellan, which navigation, though diffi- 
cult, had been performed by others, or through the same 
country of Darien, where we were at present. Thus we 
engaged, about the number of 300 men, in the service of this 
Indian Emperor, whom we took for our leader, in company 
of many others of his own subjects, who were to back our 
designs, as we intended to lead the van of most attempts. 
The name of this Emperor aforementioned was Andraeas, 
from which we guessed that some footsteps of Christianity 
had been planted in his country by the Spaniards, and that 
either he or his ancestors had been by them baptized, though 
at present they seemed to regard but little what belonged 
unto Christian religion. He had also a son, whose name was 
Augustin, and unto whom we made bold, among ourselves, 
to give the name of King Golden-Cap, from a certain cap, 
or hat, of pure and massive gold which he had then upon 
his head when first we saw him. 

The first enterprize which the said Emperor propounded 
unto us was to take the town of Santa Maria, situated pretty 
near unto the Southern Sea and at the distance of several 
days journey from the place where these things were agreed 
upon. This town, as it was said, had been taken from the 
Emperor by the covetous Spaniard, and was reported to be 
hugely rich in dust of gold, which there was gathered in great 
quantity out of the river that runs through the country. 
Here was a fort and a town pretty well garrisoned, as having 
between both about 400 Spaniards for their defence and to 
guard the treasure which there was lodged of gold-dust, as 
has been said. We marched, therefore, in company of the 
Emperor Andraeas (who always went before us, and encouraged 
our men wherever they fought) the space of three days journey, 
to meet his son King Golden-Cap at his own habitation, 
or palace, lying in our way, he being to join with us in this 
expedition. He entertained us very nobly at this palace for 
a day or two, and sent us also presents of victuals to meet 
us by the way, having heard of our coming. Thence we de- 
parted with our entire little camp, the Emperor, and his son, 
in quest of the town of Santa Maria, as yet distant from there 
no less than four or five days journey. After several fatigues 



THEY CAPTURE SANTA MARIA 263 

sustained by the way, together with the loss of some of our 
canoes by the downfalls of the rivers, and trees likewise which 
the Spaniards had cast therein to hinder our passage, we 
arrived by. night within two or three miles of Santa Maria, 
and there reposed ourselves in the woods until the next 
morning. 

Day being come, we marched towards the town, and gave 
the assault unto the place and fort : both which we carried, 
or possessed ourselves of, with no great difficulty and an incon- 
siderable loss on our side, consisting only of three men, though 
several others were wounded. Of the Spaniards we killed 
and wounded above 100. The fort was encompassed with 
palisades, called also by the Spaniards estacadas or huge 
strong and thick pales of wood. Having taken the fort 
and town, and examined our prisoners very severely concern- 
ing the treasure we there expected to find, all that we got 
out of them was very inconsiderable, in view of the huge 
expectations we had conceived in our minds. For the Spani- 
ards, having timely notice of our march, had conveyed away 
unto remoter places, towards Panama, some few days before, 
all that was valuable upon the place ; so that our disappoint- 
ment here in this particular was very great, and all that ever 
we could rob and pillage, either in the town or fort, scarce 
amounted unto twenty pound weight of gold and some small 
quantity of silver. 

Our stay here at Santa Maria was but short, not above 
the space of two days, our resolutions being to seek revenge 
for the huge loss, or rather disappointment, we had sustained 
of our vast expectations. We had here intelligence given us 
of some mine or mines of gold that were somewhere to be found 
farther on about this place, called St Maries River, but whether 
it might prove to be worth our time and labour to go seek 
them (especially considering we knew how not to come at the 
gold when we should find them out, and that the Spaniards and 
miners, or slaves, would be all fled, transporting with them 
what was already digged out) we could not easily determine. 
Hereupon we all unanimously agreed to visit the South Sea, 
unto which we were already very near, in those canoes we had 
brought with us, which were sufficient for our number, con- 
cluding either to attack Panama and ransack it anew, as 
Sir Henry Morgan had done before us, or at least that we 



2 64 THEY ENTER THE SOUTH SEA 

should meet with some considerable prize in that Sea where 
ships do navigate so quietly and but few pirates were ever seen. 

Thus, having taken in what provisions we thought necessary, 
we fell down the river in our canoes, taking the opportunity 
of the tide, and arrived the next day at the mouth of the 
river in sight of the South Sea. Here we were all in danger 
of being lost with our canoes, the wind blowing extremely 
hard and causing a violent storm, which overwhelmed one 
of our canoes with seven or eight men, who had all inevit- 
ably perished had they not been taken up with the utmost 
extremity of danger of others who ventured their lives to 
save them. This river we went down into the South Sea 
I think was called Darien, though I cannot be very positive 
herein. Being now come into the Pacific, or South Sea, we 
sailed, or rowed, along the shore towards Panama, which is 
not far distant from the mouth of the river, where we disem- 
bogued^, touching at several places or little islands in our 
way to take in water or search for provisions for our fleet of 
canoes. All this while we had in our company the Emperor 
and his son Golden-Cap, together with the Indians they 
brought into the field, so that we were a pretty considerable 
fleet of fisher-boats or canoes : each canoe had six, eight, or 
ten men on board, yea some had fourteen and more. At 
Plantin Isle, which isle lies between the mouth of the river 
we came out at and Panama, we seized a Spanish bark, which 
had a considerable number of men on board her, I believe 
above lOO, but nothing else that was worth our acceptance. 
This vessel we took in hopes of a good prize, and withal to 
mend ourselves in shipping, for this was now the biggest 
bottom we had. 

By this time those of Panama had received advice of our 
adventures at Santa Maria, as also of our coming into the 
South Sea either in quest of that city or of some other hazard- 
ous attempt. They were, therefore, infinitely alarmed at 
these news, and in great haste had thrust out to sea three 
or four small vessels or barks, though withal pretty well 
manned, which they called La Armadilla, or The Little Fleet, 
out of design to guard their coasts and oppose our attempts. 
Thus the very next day we came into the South Sea one of 
these barks belonging to the Armadilla came up with us, 

' Sec note 2 on p. 309. 



DESTRUCTION OF THE ARMADILLA 26s 

and very briskly fired at our fleet, as if they would fight us 
all ; but soon tacked about and bid us adieu, having killed 
[of] us one man and wounded six or seven more. Two days 
after we met with three more of these barks belonging to the 
Armadilla of Panama, whereof the one had on board, as well 
as I can remember, 90 men ; another had fourscore ; and 
the third threescore and five. These small men-of-war met 
with us at a great disadvantage, for that morning we had 
sent away the Spanish bark which we had taken at Plantin 
Isle, to seek for fresh water at some places, we having been 
disappointed of it where we had sought for it before ; and, 
to the intent she might go the safer and peradventure bring 
us some good purchase by the way, we had put on board her 
above 100 of our best men : so that what bottoms we had 
left were only canoes, and in them not above 200 good fighting- 
men, for of the Indians we made no great account, as wanting 
both our arms and experience to manage them. The Arma- 
dilla came up with full sail unto us, and engaged us very stoutly, 
thinking to take or destroy every canoe in our fleet ; but we, 
knowing scarce any quarter could be expected at their hands 
especially in those seas, were resolved never to surrender, 
and do the utmost of our endeavour to destroy them or make 
them fly. Thus, after the first volleys of shot, we presently 
encompassed one of these little men-of-war with our canoes, 
and as desperately ran him aboard with sword and pistol 
in hand, causing him suddenly to surrender. Being in posses- 
sion of him, we took another of their small number, and forced 
the third to fly away towards the town of Panama with all 
the sail he could make : this rencounter, or engagement, 
though but short, yet was very bloody — especially on the 
Spaniards' side — and sharp ; for in it we had a dozen of our 
men killed outright, and almost forty who were desperately 
wounded. How many the Spaniards lost or had wounded 
among them we could not learn — especially in the third 
vessel, which fought us all along very briskly and stood close 
to it for a good while even after the other two were taken ; 
so that we could not do otherwise than commend the courage 
of those Spaniards. 

The Armadilla being destroyed, we proceeded to the road 
of Panama, which we instantly blocked up with our canoes 
and other vessels, which now were three or four. Here in 



iGG BEFORE PANAMA 

the harbour, and at the mouth thereof, we took five or six 
vessels more, or rather ships, between great and small — but 
no great booty in them : amongst these only was one, called 
La Trinidad, or The Blessed Trinity, which was a ship of 
four-hundred tons and in which we found about threescore- 
thousand pieces-of-eight, that were sent to pay the garrison 
of the town or for some other effect. In this ship, being a 
good, strong and tight vessel, we came afterwards for England. 
The dividend of this prize amounted unto above 240 pieces- 
of-eight to each man ; yet had we good fortune in not being 
disappointed of this purchase, as we had been oftentimes 
before in other adventures ; for though we had blocked 
up the mouth of the road, and lay, as I have said, before 
Panama, yet this ship gave us the sHp, and got into the har- 
bour in the dark of the night both unseen and unknown to 
us. However, we having intelligence thereof, entered the 
harbour when they thought themselves in safety, and had 
the good luck to seize and make a prize of her, though not 
without some small loss of men. Both in this and other skir- 
mishes we lost in all before Panama 40 men, and had about 
50 more wounded ; so that now our small number was almost, 
if not quite, reduced unto two-third parts thereof. The 
wounded we all put into one vessel, which we appointed to be 
the hospital of our fleet, and the other vessels we manned as 
well as our number would afford to do it. After having stayed 
some days before Panama and blocked up the road, we weighed 
anchor, and went unto a little island named Tobago, there 
to provide ourselves with several necessaries, which were at 
that instant something scarce with us. As for the town of 
Panama itself, we dared not to attempt it with so small a 
number of men, they being well provided to give us a hot 
reception : only once we landed 150 men, which were as 
many as we could well spare from manning and defending our 
fleet of canoes and ships ; but found we could do no good 
against the town, being repulsed with some damage, which 
notwithstanding we made a good retreat unto our fleet. 

Being almost ready to raise the blockade of Panama, 
Captain John Coxon (or Croxen) began to vary in his resolu- 
tions, and at last openly to mutiny against the rest of the 
Company : the effect hereof was that he departed from us 
and returned back with the Emperor and his son King Golden- 



DEPARTURE OF COXON 267 

Cap and all the Indians and canoes they had brought with 
them, carrying also with him 50 of our English company and 
the best surgeon of the fleet, who belonged unto him and who 
would not go without his instruments to work withal, that is 
to say the medicaments, which we very much wanted for our 
wounded men. What medicines he left behind were not con- 
siderable in comparison of what he carried away ; but this 
point we knew not till afterwards, or we should have torn in 
pieces the said surgeon and his master rather than have parted 
with those things of which we had so much necessity. This 
piece of dishonesty of Captain Coxon weakened much our 
forces and diminished in great measure our number ; for, had 
he taken care of or carried away our wounded men, we should 
not much have resented his departure, the Indians being of no 
considerable help unto us. But here, that he may be known, 
I will not omit to tell you that the chief occasion of his grudge 
against us was because we reproached him for his ill-behaviour 
in the engagement we had with the Armadilla of Panama ; for 
in that dangerous action, to speak it all in a word, he shewed 
himself more like a coward than one of our profession, that is 
to say a true Buccaneer. What adventures he and his com- 
pany met withal after they separated from us I cannot give 
any just account thereof ; only that as we learned afterwards 
he went back unto the mouth of the river, and over land much 
by the same way he had come before, till he came to the North 
Sea (where doubtless he found the ships we had left behind 
us), being civilly entertained all along by those Indians and 
the good Emperor Andraeas and his son, though he had done 
them no great service — which sheweth the civility of those 
Indians, and what inclinations they had for us English rather 
than the Spaniards, their ancient masters. Thus we dis- 
engaged from the pretended service we had proffered unto 
that Emperor — I call it pretended, forasmuch as any one 
would easily guess that the real intent thereof was only to 
serve ourselves with gold and silver, and learn intelligence 
from those Indians where it was to be had, or, what is more 
obvious, to be led by them unto it — especially considering 
that, had we gone any other way about this matter, it might 
have cost us every one of our lives ; for these Indians of 
Darien are very fierce withal, and are the same people that 
killed and tore in pieces that famous Buccaneer L'OUonais 



268 CAPTAIN SAWKINS KILLED 

(of whom you may read many notable exploits in the History 
of the Buccaneers) and many other of his companions, for 
landing upon and offering violence to their country and 
habitations. 

But our constant resolutions were, not to go back nor return 
homewards until such time as we had made a diligent search 
into those Southern Seas, and freighted, if possible, our vessels 
with gold, or at least as much silver as they could carry : such 
vast expectations had we framed now unto ourselves, in the 
vain ideas of our minds. Captain Coxon, who commanded 
in chief, being separated or departed from us, we chose in his 
place Captain Sawkins and Captain Sharp to lead us, and were 
now reduced unto 200 men, whereof many, as was said before, 
lay dangerously wounded in the hospital-vessel. 

Having, therefore, refitted ourselves at the island of Tobago, 
which is situated over-against the road of Panama, we sailed 
thence about the middle of May, 1680, in quest of some other 
purchase or design, coasting the shore towards the Northern 
parts of America commonly called California. We persisted 
in our course the space of eight or ten days, in all which time 
nothing remarkable happened unto us ; till at the end thereof 
we arrived at the isles of Quiblo, where there is a town called 
by the Spaniards Puebla Nueva. 

Here we landed to seek provisions, and by the by to plunder 
what we could get ; but, the country being alarmed since our 
blocking up the road of Panama, they had put themselves into 
an indifferent good posture of defence, and hereupon watched 
for our coming, and were resolved to entertain us as warmly 
as they could. Captain Sawkins therefore, landing before the 
rest, as being a man of undaunted courage, and running up 
with a small party to some breast-works they had made before 
the town, was here unfortunately killed, more through his own 
temerity and the rashness of his conduct than any other cause. 
Those who followed could not possibly rescue him, as being 
not yet quite landed : besides him, two or three more were 
killed and five or six wounded, which caused the residue of 
those he had led up to retreat unto the waterside as fast as 
they could. Thus we were beaten off from the place, and got 
nothing but blows for our pains. 

But this disaster occasioned a second mutiny amongst our 
men : our Commanders were not thought to be leaders fit 



SHARP MADE COMMANDER 269 

enough for such great and hard enterprizes. Now Captain 
Sharp was left in chief, and he was censured by many. The 
contest grew so hot and came to that degree that we divided 
again into parties, and about threescore-and-ten more of our 
men fell off from us, separated, and returned back overland, 
as Coxon and the others had done before. Others who com- 
manded vessels threw up their commissions (I can only name 
unto you Captain Cook for one), in whose room others were 
placed to command their ships. Thus all things were in great 
distraction, and our company decreased daily ; yet others 
held constant to their resolutions, and were still determined 
to be buried in those seas rather than to return home without 
the gold they had fought for so long and through so many 
dangers. At the mouth of the river belonging to this place 
we surprised a bark, or great boat, which was laden with maize, 
or Indian wheat, which stood us in very good stead at that 
present ; for provisions now again began to grow somewhat 
scarce with us. Our Commander now was Captain Sharp, and 
our number was only of 130, or not quite 140. 

We sailed from Puebla Nueva, and steered our course for 
the islands called De los Galapagos, or in English Tortoise 
Islands, from the huge number of tortoises which there are to 
be found. These islands, which are seven or eight, all compre- 
hended under the same name, lie very close unto, if not under, 
the equinoctial line : there we intended to careen our vessels 
and seek more provisions ; but, the winds proving contrary 
for a long while, we could not reach them, and were con- 
strained to take up for the same purpose with another little 
island called Gorgona, where indifferent good accommodation 
was found for refitting our ships. Here we careened and got 
in provisions, staying here for these two intents above a month, 
so that it was towards the latter end of July before we departed 
thence. Three or four days after we set out from Gorgona we 
lost Captain Sharp in the dark of the night, and with him the 
best vessel we had, which was the Trinity, the same ship which 
we had taken out of the harbour of Panama. This loss occa- 
sioned sundry distractions in our minds, not knowing what 
would become of us after so many misfortunes : he was gone 
from us a whole fortnight or thereabouts ; neither had we any 
hopes of finding him any more, till at last, we happening to 
put in at Drake's Isle to seek for provisions, he happily arrived 



270 DRAKE'S ISLAND ; GUAYAQUIL 

there three days after, which caused in us infinite joy, he 
having the best vessel and stoutest men on board : yes, we 
had missed of him this time Ukewise, and perhaps for ever, 
had we not, by a misfortune of sinking our canoe, which was 
sent ashore, tarried there one day longer than we determined. 

Having sailed from Drake's Isle, we arrived in seven or 
eight days after over against Guayaquil. Hereabouts, by 
night, we took a little Spanish man-of-war, like unto the vessel 
of the Armadilla of Panama ; who was come out from Guaya- 
quil, and in a true blue Spanish bravado had undertaken to 
take or destroy us with that little tool and only 30 or 40 men. 
The Captain's name was Don Thomas de Argandona, of which 
name and family, as I am credibly informed, there have been 
several sea-commanders in this age who were both skilful and 
courageous men. The vessel we thought fit to sink, as being 
of no use unto us and wanting men to man her. In the fight 
we lost none of our men, and only three were wounded ; what 
the Spaniards lost I do not remember. The prisoners told us 
that some of our men who had deserted us at Puebla Nueva 
had landed in a bark not far from Guayaquil, and that all of 
them were killed by the inhabitants of an island where they 
landed, excepting one : what became of the rest, I have not 
yet learned. This was the occasion of fitting out this bark 
against us, little thinking perhaps that we had a ship of four- 
hundred ton under us, and only being persuaded they should 
meet with some such little bark or canoe as that was, whose 
men their neighbours had destroyed a little before. 

About a week or ten days after, we took another prize more 
valuable than the former : this was a ship of three-hundred 
ton called St Peter, and was loaden with coco-nuts, broad- 
cloth, timber, and other goods, and was bound for Lima, which 
is the capital city of Peru. We took out of her what we most 
wanted, or thought fit for our designs, and, having cut down 
the main mast, let her go with all the prisoners we had, and 
most of the provisions that was on board her. This was about 
the beginning of September, 1680, as my notes tell me. 

Towards the latter end of October we descried the land of 
Arica, having sustained beforehand for many days infinite 
hunger and thirst. For provisions at length grew so scarce 
with us that we were allowed only five ounces of meal, and 
one pint of water to each man, the Captain himself having no 



THEY SEIZE COQUIMBO 271 

more allowance than the rest : yea, at last, some were found 
among us who gave 30 pieces-of-eight for a pint of water, and 
very glad they were to get it, so near starving we were when 
we came to Arica. Here we could land no men, the sea was 
so big, which made us go to a port close by called He lo he. 

At this port we landed, and found some provisions, especially 
at a sugar-works not far distant thence. Here we refreshed, 
and feasted ourselves pretty well for three or four days. The 
Spaniards came unto us with a flag of truce, and promised to 
bring us in good store of beeves and hogs, as many as we de- 
manded, provided we would spare their ingenio de azucar, or 
sugar- works, and not pull it down ; which we promised to do. 
But, two days after, these treacherous Spaniards sent 300 
horsemen against us, instead of bringing the cattle, with full 
intent to destroy us if possibly they could. We drew out our 
men into a plain, and at the first volley killed several of them, 
which made them wheel about and instantly retire, though 
at first they came very fiercely against us. With this we re- 
tired to our vessels, knowing no more good was to be done 
there at that time, nor at Arica ; for by this body of horse 
we perceived all the country was alarmed against us. 

From He lo he that day month we arrived at Coquimbo, 
upon which place we resolved to revenge our former affronts 
at Arica. Here we met with a body of 150 horse just at our 
landing, which always watch the bay ; who instantly set upon 
us with great fury, and made a circle about the first party of 
our men that were landed, thinking to make sure of our de- 
struction and cut us all in pieces. But we stood to our arms 
very courageously, killed and wounded several of them, and 
routed them soon, having only one man wounded on our side. 
We followed them close at their heels into the town, which 
we instantly took with no loss at all. This action was per- 
formed with only four-score men, a few more or less, and the 
first party that fought the horse were under 40. When we 
came into the town, we found it was of a considerable bigness, 
and had no less than eight or nine churches, which made us 
fear there were more inhabitants than we could master, as 
being so few in number that it were impossible to fight our 
way through them, should they come to a head and make any 
resistance. As therefore we met the inhabitants, we told them 
they must repair to the church or churches, or else expect no 



272 COQUIMBO SACKED 

quarter from them that were following us who were many 
hundreds in number ; for we were only the forerunners of a 
greater body of Pirates that were at our heels. Having so 
done, and got several churches full of the inhabitants, we 
placed at each door a barrel of gunpowder with a train to it 
and a man standing with a lighted match, who told them that, 
if they offered to stir out, he would presently give fire ; but 
none offered to attempt it. So that by this means, while the 
inhabitants remained in that confinement, we plundered the 
town at our leisure. Here we found great store of provisions 
of all sorts ; for the town is very pleasant and finely adorned 
with orchards of fruit, vineyards, and gardens. At Coquimbo 
is also gold-dust to be found in a river that runneth close by 
the place. Here another piece of treachery was put upon us 
by the Governor of the town. After a flag of truce and some 
complements sent to and fro between us, he came to an 
amicable parley with our Captain and only two more, one on 
each side, where they drank very friendly together upon a 
hill close by the town, he keeping the fields with his horsemen 
and all those that were fled out of the town. There he pro- 
mised to ransom the town from fire, for 95,000 pieces-of-eight, 
which should be sent us in within a day or two. But that 
night or the next they contrived to fire our ship, an Indian 
swimming aboard under the stern with a ball of combustible 
matter, which he fixed there unseen to our men ; so that, had 
it not been discovered by the stink before it burst out into a 
flame, we had all, both on shore and land, inevitably perished. 
The next day they half-drowned the town by letting in many 
sluices of water upon us ; by which acts of hostility and 
treachery we perceived no faith nor money more than what 
we had already got was to be expected from them. Thus we 
set fire to the town, staying as long as we could till it was all 
in a flame, locked up the doors of the churches, and marched 
out, fighting our way down to our boats, which we easily did, 
for they made no great opposition after the first volleys of 
our shot, which killed some few of them. Here we set Captain 
Argandona on shore. Captain Peralta, who was taken in the 
ship that was bound for Lima, and other prisoners which we 
had still remaining on board our vessel, and whom we all along 
entertained very well. We were in possession of the town of 
Coquimbo only four or five days, and for our booty we brought 



WATLING MADE COMMANDER 273 

away five-hundred pound weight of plate, besides jewels, 
goods, and other things. 

From Coquimbo we sailed to the isles of Juan Fernandez, 
where we kept our Christmas that year 1680, finding there 
good plenty of provisions, and as much dissention among our 
men — who would not return home that year, as our Captain 
would have them to do, but make a farther search for gold, 
or golden prizes, into those seas. But the true occasion of 
their grudge was that Captain Sharp had got by these adven- 
tures, as it was said, almost a-thousand pound, whereas many 
of our men were scarce worth a groat : and good reason there 
was for their poverty, for at the Isle of Plata, called by us 
Drake's Isle, and other places, they had lost all their money 
to their fellow Buccaneers at dice — so that some had a great 
deal, and others just nothing. Those who were thrifty men 
sided with Captain Sharp, and were for returning home ; but 
the others chose another Commander, by name John Watling, 
and turned Sharp out of his commission, pretending they could 
do it as being a free election. And so they might do, for they 
were the greatest number by far ; and power may pretend to 
any thing. This contest had like to have come to blows among 
us ; but some prudent men moderated the matter, and per- 
suaded Captain Sharp's party to have patience for a while — 
at least seeing they were the fewest, and had moneys to lose, 
which the other party had not. 

By order of our new Commander Watling we set sail pre- 
sently after the beginning of the New Year 1681 from the isles 
of Juan Fernandez, and were resolved to go and plunder 
Arica, both to find employment for our discontented party, 
as being a vastly rich place, and to remember them for the 
shams put upon us at He lo he or Ylo. Just as we were ready 
to sail, three men-of-war came upon us, one of eight, another 
of twelve, and the third of sixteen guns. We had not so much 
as one gun, for all our vessel was of four-hundred ton or more. 
Neither had we now more than one ship, we having sunk the 
Mayflower, wherein Captain Cox sailed, upon the coast of 
Guayaquil, by reason we had broken her bowsprit with the 
stern of the Trinity, which had her in a tow, and could not 
fit her with another. These ships now being three against one, 
and we not able to divide them, as we endeavoured to do, by 
running on board their Admiral before the rest could come up. 



274 REPULSE AT ARICA 

we thought fit to run for it. So we did, bidding them adieu 
in the night, and steering directly, as I have mentioned, for 
Arica. 

We landed at Arica, and fought the town with 93 men, 
which number was all we could conveniently spare. We got 
into the town and took several of their breast-works, yet were 
repulsed from the castle, and afterwards beaten out of the 
town by the country-people, who poured in upon us in huge 
numbers ; so that we were forced to retreat unto our boats, 
fighting our way through above 1000 men who were gathered 
against us : this was the hardest shock we had in all the South 
Sea. Captain Watling, our Commander-in-chief, was here 
killed ; through whose ill-conduct, as it was thought, this mis- 
fortune happened unto us. For, had he assaulted the fort in 
time, before the people and soldiers that ran out of the town 
were got into it, we had undoubtedly carried all before us. 
But he trifled away his time in giving quarter and taking 
prisoners upon the breastworks, till at last we had more 
prisoners than we could command. We placed some of these 
prisoners before the front of our men, when we assaulted the 
castle, just as Sir Henry Morgan did the nuns and friars at 
Porto Bello ; but the Spaniards fired as well at them as at us. 
In a word, we lost here 40 men, nine of which were taken 
prisoners, being our surgeons and others, while they were 
dressing the wounded at the hospital ; which loss of our 
surgeons increased our damage very much, and only 42 or 43 
were left serviceable to fight our way through so many hundred 
of foot and horse unto our boats, we not losing one man by 
the way, though several were wounded : so much did we awe 
them with our fuzees, and so afraid were they to break in 
upon us, though we were almost three miles from our boats. 
This repulse we resented more than any other we ever sustained 
before, since here was more plate and gold than we could well 
carry away, by reason it is the emharcadero, or place where all 
the vast riches that are brought from the mountains of Potosy 
are shipped off for Panama, whence it goes into Spain. Now 
Captain Sharp was chosen again, his conduct being thought 
safer than any other man's, and they having had trial of 
another leader. Our surgeons we left behind had quarter from 
the enemy, they being able to do good service in that country ; 
but our wounded men were all knocked on the head, as we 



FURTHER DESERTIONS 275 

understood afterwards. This misfortune fell to us on the 30th 
of January, being King Charles' day, as I can remember by 
some tokens. 

Having set sail from Arica, we cruized to and fro for the 
space of six weeks, but could meet with nothing that was to 
our purpose. By this time provisions grew scarce again, and 
our men began to mutiny anew ; some being for going home, 
and others for staying longer till they had got more moneys. 
To find them employment we put in at a place called Guasco. 
Here we landed some of our men, took some prisoners, and 
got in provisions, but did nothing else considerable. We 
landed again afterwards within two leagues of Ylo, or He lo he, 
where we took many prisoners, and thanked them for their 
former kindness unto us, which we had not yet forgotten, as 
they found by experience this time. 

After this, about the middle of April, 1681, our dissentions 
grew so high among us that above 40 more of our men deserted 
us, and in boats and canoes rowed away from us, to go home 
overland through the province of Darien, as their companions 
had done before. They steered their course in quest of St 
Maries River, belonging to that country, as was mentioned 
before : their chief grudge was against Captain Sharp, whom 
they envied and would not obey ; neither would we be brought 
to choose another Commander, knowing that neither by that 
means we should ever be able to keep them quiet. Thus we 
parted with them, allowing them what was necessary for their 
voyage, or they rather taking it away with them ; but we 
would not quarrel about it. Now our company and forces 
were extremely weakened, but our hearts as yet were good ; 
and, though we had met with many disappointments in several 
places, yet we hoped that at last, by some means or other, we 
should attain the ends of our desires, which was to enrich 
ourselves. 

Finding it very cold and bad weather in the latitude where 
we were, we sailed Northward, and about the beginning of 
May we came to the Gulf of Nicoya, where we anchored at an 
island called Chero. Here we took down our upper-deck, and 
sank our quarter-deck, and fitted ourselves very well to sea 
again. This was all performed by help of a Spanish carpenter 
and six or seven of his men, who were building some vessels 
in a river close by. We rewarded them for their pains with 



276 DESERTION OF THE INTERPRETER 

one of our barks, which we gave them, and for their sakes 
turned loose all our prisoners, excepting some negroes, which 
we detailed to do our drudgery. One man was lost here, who 
was drowned, our drunken men overturning the boat as they 
came from shore. 

From Chero we went to the island of El Cavallo, where we 
lost our interpreter, who had done us good service all along, 
and at this place ran away from us, as we judged, unto the 
Spaniards, leaving behind him all that he had purchased in 
the voyage, which was worth nigh 500 pound in money and 
goods. What should be his intent in this action we could not 
know, except to betray us unto that nation. 

He was a Dutchman by birth, and his name James Marquis, 
and was very intelligent in the Spanish lingua, and besides 
that in several others. After his departure we had no great 
use for an interpreter, neither now did we much want one ; 
yet, in what occasions we had, we made use of one Mr. Ring- 
rose, who was with us in all this voyage, and being a good 
scholar and full of ingeniosity had also good skill in languages. 
This gentleman kept an exact and very curious Journal of all 
our voyage from our first setting out to the very last day ; 
took also all the observations we made, and likewise an accu- 
rate description of all the ports, towns, and lands we came to. 
His papers, or rather his diary, with all his drafts, are now in 
the hands of a person of my acquaintance at Wapping in 
London, and, as he telleth me, are very nigh being printed, 
which, if it be so, as I hope he will not fail to do it, I shall 
refer you for the truth of what I have here said, unto those 
papers ; for I desire to be corrected by them, if in any thing 
here delivered my memory has failed me, for I am certain he 
kept all along the best and truest account of all things that 
happened, beyond any man about us, and observed more 
particularities than any one else. Yet I am sure I have not 
much deviated from the truth in what is here set down ; only 
that, perhaps, I have omitted many things which I have for- 
gotten, my notes being very short concerning all the voyage. 

In June, 1 681, we cleaned our vessel in the gulf called Dulce, 
which we had not done so long before, and you may easily 
believe was by this time very foul. Having sailed thence, 
towards El Cabo de San Francisco, or Cape St Francis, some- 
where about that Cape in July we took a ship that was bound 



CAPTURE OF THE ROSARIO 277 

for Panama and was laden with cacao-nuts, and had besides 
some small quantity of plate on board her. We took out of 
her the plate and goods, and what else we pleased, cut down 
the main-mast, and so let her go before the wind towards the 
port she was bound unto. About a fortnight after, at Cabo 
del Paffao, we took another small prize which was bound for 
Paita or Lima, that being the harbour, or landing-place, of 
all that goes up to that great city, the head of Peru. This was 
only a kind of packet-boat that was goin^ from Panama to 
Paita : she ran in under the shore when W6 gave her chase, 
and most of the passengers and other people got to land ; but 
we took the greatest part of them, and dismissed them the 
next day, not knowing what to do with them, so they were 
forced to foot it overland back again to Panama. The vessel 
likewise we turned loose before the wind, the next day after 
we had rummaged her pretty well, as having no farther service 
for her. The next after, we came up with another sail at Cape 
Paffao (where we took the packet-boat), which proved to be 
one of the greatest adventures of this whole voyage, if not the 
greatest of all, had we but known our own happy fortune, and 
how to make good use of it. This was a ship called El Santo 
Rosario, or The Holy Rosary, of an indifferent big burthen 
and loaded with brandy and oil, wine and fruit, besides good 
store of other provisions. They fired at us first, but we came 
up-board to board with them, and gave them such volleys of 
small shot that they were soon forced to surrender, having 
several of their men wounded, their Captain killed, and one 
only man more. In this ship, besides the lading above- 
mentioned, we found also almost 700 pigs of plate, but we 
took them to be some other metal, especially tin : and under 
this mistake they were slighted by us all, especially the Captain 
and seamen, who by no persuasions used by some few, who 
were for having them rummaged, could not be induced to take 
them into our ship, as we did most of the other things. Thus 
we left them on board the Rosario, aad, not knowing what to 
do with the bottom in that scarcity of men we were under, 
we turned her away loose unto the sea, being very glad we 
had got such good belly-timber out of her and thinking little 
what quantity of rich metal we left behind. It should seem 
this pUte was not yet thoroughly refined and fitted for to 
coin ; and this was the occasion that deceived us all. One 



278 BOOK OF SEA-CHARTS 

only pig of plate, out of the whole number of almost 700, we 
took into our ship, thinking to make bullets of it ; and to this 
effect, or what else our seamen pleased, the greatest part of 
it was melted or squandered away. Afterwards, when we 
arrived at Antigua, we gave the remaining part of it, which 
was yet about one-third thereof, unto a Bristol man, who knew 
presently what it was (though he dissembled with us), brought 
it to England, and sold it there for seventy-five-pound sterling, 
as he confessed him^self afterwards to some of our men. Thus 
we parted with the richest booty we had gotten in the whole 
voyage, through our own ignorance and laziness. 

In this ship, the Rosario, we took also a great book full of 
sea-charts and maps, containing a very accurate and exact 
description of all the ports, sounding, creeks, rivers, capes, and 
coasts belonging to the South Sea, and all the navigations 
usually performed by the Spaniards in that ocean. This book, 
it seemeth, serveth them for an entire and complete Wagender^, 
in those parts, and for its novelty and curiosity was presented 
unto His Majesty after our return into England. It has been 
since translated into English, as I hear, by His Majesty's 
order, and the copy of the translation, made by a Jew, I have 
seen at Wapping ; but withal the printing thereof is severely 
prohibited, lest other nations should get into those seas and 
make use thereof, which is wished may be reserved only for 
England against its due time. The seaman who at first laid 
hold on it, on board the Rosario, told us the Spaniards were 
going to cast this book overboard, but that he prevented them, 
which notwithstanding we scarce did give entire credit unto, 
as knowing in what confusion they all were. Had the Captain 
himself been alive at that time, his story would have deserved 
more belief ; yet, howsoever, if the Spaniards did not attempt 
to throw this book into the sea, at least they ought to have 
done it for the reasons that are obvious to every man's under- 
standing and are hinted at before. We parted with the Rosario 
and her plate the last day of July, 1681. 

Here it was, at Cape Paffao, immediately after our turning 

away to sea the Rosario, and on the first or second day of 

Aitgust, 1681, that we set up our resolutions to seek no farther 

into those seas, but to come away for England round about 

the Strait of Magellan or by Strait Le Maire. This voyage 

^ Lucas Wagenaer, Den Nieuwen Spieghel der Zccvaert . , . in 
diversche Zeecaerien begrepen ; folio, Amr.terdam 1596. 



THEY SAIL FOR ENGLAND 279 

we thought less dangerous by far, seeing others had performed 
it before us, than to go overland, as our companions went, 
through such great and imminent dangers both of Indians and 
Spaniards ; through which nations, peradventure, we should 
be forced to fight our way almost every step we made : after 
which, when we came to the North Sea, we knew not how to 
get any shipping to convey us unto Jamaica ; for we could 
not question but our own ships were either departed long be- 
fore that time or at least taken up and carried away by our 
companions and deserters ; besides that we had too much 
goods and luggage to carry overland, taken out of our several 
prizes, which we were unwilling to lose. Our chief motives 
for this sudden departure for England were the huge scarcity 
of men we had at that present ; for now our whole number 
was reduced unto 64 men, whereof many were not fit to bear 
arms, as being negroes and others, that had only courage or 
skill to do our drudgery : this number, we feared, by any 
farther encounters might be so far lessened as scarce to be able 
to man our ship, at least to convey us home in safety; whereby, 
should we weaken it more, we might come to lose all we had 
got. And now we had purchased in the Rosario good store of 
provisions, especially of wine and brandy, sufficient to last, as 
we hoped, for such a voyage ; which, should we diminish upon 
farther adventures, we knew not when we should be so well 
provided again. The last motive was that most of our men 
had gotten pretty well by this voyage, and were afraid to lose 
by farther adventures what they had already purchased ; for, 
though some of our men had made away or lost all their money 
at play, yet others were so much the richer by their losses. 
For these reasons we set sail from Cape Paffao on the third day 
of August, to seek for the Strait of Magellan, or that of Le 
Maire, thereby to return into England, or at least unto the 
Leeward Islands. 

This voyage round about the Strait of Magellan, or rather 
beyond it, as also beyond the Strait of Le Maire, we performed 
in just six months, a day or two more or less, till we arrived 
at Antego at the end of January, 1681, having set forth from 
Cape Paffao, in the South Sea, at the beginning of August, 
1681, as was said before. In all this long and tedious voyage 
very little happened unto us that was remarkable, neither had 
we any encounter with enemies either by sea or land that is 



28o HOSTILE RECEPTION AT LIMA 

worth rehearsing — only two or three things I shall hint unto 
you by the by. 

At Paita, which is the landing-place, or harbour, belonging 
to the court of Lima, situated some few miles distant from the 
sea, we endeavoured to land some of our men upon the side 
of the bay. Having manned already our canoes for this intent 
with 30 or 40 men, which was now the greatest number we 
could spare, we descried many hundred men, both horse and 
foot, drawn up into battle-array, who waited for our landing. 
By this sight we perceived that we were discovered, and that 
the whole country was alarmed against us, whereby we judged 
it would be the greatest piece of rashness in the world to go 
ashore and throw ourselves, being so few, into the mouths of 
so many enemies. Hereupon we gave over the design we had 
against that rich place, went back into our ship, and sailed 
away for the Strait of Fernando de Magellan. 

In October we had very hard weather, that we had much 
ado to keep the seas. This was, if I well remember, about 
50 degrees and a half of Southern latitude. Here, in this stress 
of weather, we spied a high land, unto which we made, and 
came to an anchor in a good harbour, where we moved our 
ship to the land. Here we stayed all the remaining part of 
that month, which was about three weeks, fishing and fowling 
for our maintenance, as much as the weather would permit 
us — thereby to save our other provisions. We took one Indian 
prisoner, but could not learn of him what country that was, 
as not understanding his language : we sought for others, but 
they were fled. These Indians are very wild, and do eat raw 
flesh. Unto this place we gave the name of the Duke of York's 
Island, more by guess than anything else ; for whether it were 
an island or continent we could not tell — only we conceived 
it to be so, and that other islands there might be adjoining 
unto it. One of our company, whose name was Shergall, was 
drowned as we went into the harbour, falling overboard from 
the sprit-sail-top. 

About the beginning of November, we set forth again hence, 
seeking for the Straits either of Magellan or Le Maire, but 
could find neither of them. The hardness of the weather was 
such that we missed both of them, and were driven many 
degrees beyond them : neither could we make any land, but 
came round about such a way as peradventure never any 



DISPERSAL OF THE BUCCANEERS 281 

mortals came before us. Yet nothing remarkable did we see 
or meet withal, except hard weather, and here and there some 
floats of ice of two or three leagues long. We were very nigh 
60 degrees of Southern latitude : this is all I can remember, 
not having any Journal nor the particular observations by me 
that were taken when the weather permitted. 

Thus we arrived, by God's infinite mercy, in safety at the 
island of Barbados, just at the latter end of January, 1681. 
Here a boat came off to us that belonged to the Richmond 
frigate : we were afraid of the said frigate, lest she should 
seize us for pirateering, and strip us of all we had got in the 
whole voyage. Hereupon we stood away for the isle of 
Antigua, but could not get leave to come into the harbour, 
though to obtain it we sent a present of jewels unto the Gover- 
nor's lady ; but he would not grant it, and our jewels were 
returned us very civilly. Hence we resolved every one to shift 
for ourselves : the ship in which we came home, which was 
the Trinity, as I have said before, taken by us at Panama, 
we gave away to seven or eight of our men who had payed 
away all their money. Thus we dispersed, some of our com- 
pany coming to England, others going to Jamaica, Barbados, 
New England, Virginia, and other places. The island of Bar- 
bados was the very first land we descried in the whole voyage 
of three-months' time, that is ever since we set out from the 
Duke of York's Island, as we named the place at the beginning 
of November. This navigation, performed by us, proves that 
several degrees more to the South of the Strait of Magellan, 
or that of Le Maire — especially about 58, 59, or 60 degrees 
of Southern latitude — there is a much easier passage from the 
North unto the South Sea than through either of these two 
Straits. Also that there is no such continent as Terra A ustralis 
incognita, as is named and described in all the ancient maps : 
so that it is but steering many degrees higher to the South 
and one may go as easily into the South Sea, or come thence 
into the North Sea, as we can go from England to Jamaica, 
only that the voyage, peradventure, will be something longer 
than by the Strait of Magellan, which makes not much to 
the purpose, but is rather much better seeing it is performed 
through an open sea and with less danger by far than through 
either of those Straits. All these things I hope will very dis- 
tinctly be made out in the papers, maps, and drafts of that 



282 TRIAL AT THE MARSHALSEA 

ingenious man Mr Ringrose above-mentioned, unto which I 
must of necessity refer you, against the time of their coming 
forth in print. 

Captain Sharp our Commander, myself, and several others 
came for England, soon after the performance of this voyage. 
Here several of us were put into prison and tried for our lives, 
at the suit of Don Pedro de Ronquillo, the Spanish Ambas- 
sador, for committing piracy and robberies in the South Sea ; 
but we were acquitted by a jury after a fair trial, they wanting 
witnesses to prove what they intended : neither had they had 
any at all against us, were it not for two or three villains of 
our own company, among which were two negroes who turned 
cat in the pan^, and had a spleen against Captain Sharp and 
others that had profited more by the voyage than they had 
done. One chief article against us was the taking of the 
Rosario and killing the Captain thereof and another man ; but 
it was proved the Spaniards fired at us first, as I have hinted 
at above, and thus it was judged we ought to defend ourselves. 
During the space of our imprisonment and trial several others 
of our company were forced to abscond and keep themselves 
concealed very close, for fear of being taken and brought under 
the same indictment. Also at Jamaica three of our company 
who arrived there were taken and cast into prison, and one of 
them was hanged who was wheedled into an open confession 
of his crime : the other two stood it out, and escaped, as I 
suppose, for want of witnesses to prove the fact against them. 
Our trial was at the Marshalsea in Southwark, by a Court of 
Admiralty. 

Thus far I have given you an account of our adventures in 
the South Sea. But here you inquire of me what is become 
of Captain Sharp since the time of his trial ? I must tell you 
I could wish I had a better account to give of him than what 
I have at present : he wasted all his money here in good 
fellowship in a short while after that he was set at liberty ; 
much he spent also while he was under confinement, so that 
he was soon reduced low, as most of the Buccaneers use to be 
after their voyages, according to what is truly enough related 
of them in that History. Having spent all his money, he 
resolved to go seek for m.ore, and that by the same means he 

^ An old proverbial saying (occurring in Heywood's Proverhes, 
1546): to prove perfidious, to change sides — probably a culinary 
metaphor, from cate (cake). 



THE LAST OF CAPTAIN SHARP 283 

had used formerly ; yet an order there was, either from the 
Privy Council or the Court of Admiralty, that no Commander 
should carry him into those parts of the West Indies again, 
fearing lest he should do more mischief unto the Spaniards, 
contrary to the articles, beyond the line, for they had notice 
given them he intended to return thither to make new dis- 
coveries upon those coasts, and unto this effect had already 
taken up his passage in one of His Majesty's frigates — but this 
order prevented him. As for merchant-ships, they refused to 
carry ^lim, fearing he would tempt the men to revolt agninst 
the masters, and by this means run away with the ship to 
privateering, as he had done before. 

Not finding, therefore, any means to get out of England, he 
got together a Httle money, and with this he bought an old 
boat, which, as I am told, used to lie above London Bridge, 
for the sum of £20 sterling. Into this boat he put a small 
quantity of butter and cheese, and a dozen or two pieces of 
beef : these were his provisions : his crew were only 16 m.en. 
With this equipage he sailed down the river, and came unto 
the Downs : hereabouts, as 'tis said, he met with a French 
vessel, which he clapt aboard, seized, and made himself master 
thereof. Presently after he sank his own boat, which he in- 
tended to carry no farther than until he could provide himself 
with a better bottom. Upon Romney Marsh he espied some 
cattle, and thereupon sent some men ashore to provide what 
they thought lit for the present victualling of their vessel. 
Thus he is gone out of England, but whither, upon what 
design, or what adventures he has met withal since, I cannot 
tell you. 



THE 

BUCCANEERS OF AMERICA 

the second volume 
Containing the Dangerous Voyage and Bold Attempts 

OF 

CAPTAIN BARTHOLOMEW SHARP 

and others 

performed upon the coasts of the 

South Sea for the space of two years 

From the Original Journal of the said Voyage 

written by 

MR BASIL RINGROSE, Gent. 

Wlio was all along present at those Transactions 




■ ^ 



PART IV 



Containing the dangerous voyage and bold assaults 
OF Captain Bartholomew Sharp and others, 

PERFORMED IN THE SoUTH SeA, FOR 
THE SPACE OF TWO YEARS, ETC. 

THE PREFACE TO THE READER 

The general applause wherewith the History of the Buccaneers 
has been received could have no other effect than easily to 
persuade the Publisher of that piece to undertake the Second 
Volume thereof, especially considering that the same points 
which deserved the credit and commendation of the first did 
seem to subsist for the like esteem and reception of the second. 
These were the fidehty of the relations both here and there 
pubUshed, the authors having been not only eye-witnesses but 
also actors in the transactions they report ; the candour and 
sincerity of the style ; the variety and pleasantness of these 
voyages ; the greatness of the attempts here related ; the un- 
paralleled courage of the Buccaneers ; the strangeness of their 
performances ; the novelty of their exploits ; and, withal, the 
glory and grandeur of valour which here is seen to be inherent 
to our English nation, and as pregnant of great actions in the 
present as in the former ages. Unto which points may be 
added in this Second Volume for its recommendation the 
grand discovery of a new passage into the South Sea, beyond 
the Straits of Magellan and Le Maire through an open and in 
no wise dangerous ocean without those formidable perils from 
rocks, currents, and shoals which hitherto have rendered the 
two passages aforementioned altogether inaccessible to 
u 289 



290 THE PREFACE TO THE READER 

trading : a navigation performed by Captain Sharp and his 
companions, many degrees beyond what Sir Francis Drake, 
Jacob Le Maire, Noord, or Magellan himself, who first circum- 
navigated the world, ever reached unto in their saiUngs. This 
discovery alone, as hugely beneficial to mankind, so may it 
seem sufficient of itself to recommend the present piece unto 
the public, even as extremely necessary to all such as navigaie 
the ocean, and no less delightful unto those persons whose 
studies are directed to the search of nature, to the arts of 
mathematics or navigation. Besides which point, both of art, 
curiosity, and usefulness, we have given unto us here by Mr 
Ringrose an exact account of many places in the South Sea ; 
the very draughts and maps of many ports, islands, bays, 
gulfs, points, and coasts, hitherto unknown to the greatest 
part of Europe — their appearance at sea, their surroundings, 
landings, and bearings ; together with what variety of winds 
and weather, of currents and calms, and other observations 
the Buccaneers experimented in those parts. All which things, 
as they manifest unto us the inquisitiveness of the author, so 
ought we highly to applaud his curiosity and genius, who all 
along the course of this voyage not only fought with his sword 
in the most desperate engagements and battles of the Bucca- 
neers against the Spaniards, but with his pen gave us a true 
account of those transactions, and with his pencil has de- 
lineated unto us the very scenes of those tragedies. Thus we 
find him totally employed towards our information and in- 
struction at home while he endured the greatest fatigues and 
hardship abroad : at the same time making quadrants at sea 
that others sat idle and murmuring upon the decks ; at the 
same time shipwrecked and almost naked and starving upon 
a desert island, and yet describing, even more exactly than 
the Spaniards themselves, the Gulf of Ballona (otherwise 
called of San Miguel) , where he was cast away. These things, 
I say, as they are not undeserving of the highest praise and 
commendation in this ingenious gentleman, Mr Ringrose 
their author, so shall the curios of nature and posterity 
itself be his eternal debtors for their acquaintance with these 
writings. 

Some imperfect account of these transactions, both short 
and in many things defective, I gave last year unto the public, 
at the end of the second impression of the History of the 



THE PREFACE TO THE READER 291 

Buccaneers. But, such as that relation was, I had no better 
then to give ; neither had I then seen the present Journal of 
Mr Ringrose, and that same account being received from the 
hands of some of the Buccaneers themselves at Wapping, it 
was esteemed fit, both by me and others, to be published at 
that time. But as the author of those papers, mistrusting 
both his own memory and sufficiency, remits himself in that 
narrative unto the Journal of Mr Ringrose, and desires by this 
alone to be corrected or supplied either in what he was mis- 
taken or deficient — so now, this Diary being published, I hope 
I have vindicated myself from any fault in history, having 
brought these papers to light by which those others were 
beforehand both acknowledged and desired to be amended. 

As to my other Journal of this voyage, I shall not concern 
myself in the least with their veracity, nor meddle with their 
relations — knowing that, if any other person did take it, that 
no person in the voyage was so able as Mr Ringrose. Yet I 
know that divers narratives, in many points differing from 
one another, have at several times been made public of one 
and the same battle, one and the same siege, voyage, journey, 
or other transaction. And indeed all human affairs, whereso- 
ever reported by various persons, though all were present at 
the times and places of their circumvolution, are necessarily 
subject to some diversity in the rehearsal — one person observ- 
ing, omitting, contracting, dilating, understanding, or mis- 
taking one particular point or part of any transaction more 
than another. 

Having premised this much, I shall here only declare that 
what is here asserted shall be supported by Mr Ringrose him- 
self whenever he returns into England — yea, and owned for 
truth by Captain Bartholomew Sharp, as the chiefest actor in 
these affairs, as soon as he comes home again ; and, if any 
other person can show unto the world any Journal of the same 
voyage more complete, more exact, more elaborate, more 
curious and informing than Mr Ringrose has done, he shall 
deserve the laurel for me. 

The case being thus stated concerning the present narrative 
or Journal, I hope no person for the future will asperse or mis- 
construe the sincerity of my intentions in relation to the 
public. This I speak under that due resentment I ought to 
have for being traduced the last year by some persons who, 



292 THE PREFACE TO THE READER 

being transported with too much passion and partiahty, would 
have nobody else to be an admirer of the person and valorous 
actions of Sir Henry Morgan or the rest of the Buccaneers but 
themselves. As if to publish a translation of the unparalleled 
exploits of that Jamaican hero — ^to give him this commend- 
able title ; to say that both he and his companions had acted 
beyond mortal men in America ; to compare them to Alex- 
ander, Julius Caesar, and the Nine Worthies of Fame ; to 
propose them unto our English nation as the truest patterns 
of undaunted and exemplary courage that it ever produced, 
were to disparage the conduct of Sir Henry Morgan and his 
companions — as if all this were intended only to diminish the 
glory of his actions and eclipse the splendour of his and their 
valorous triumphs. Methinks, if envy reach thus far, with the 
same reason or unjust measure those persons may say that to 
publish this present Journal is to divulge nothing else than a 
satire against Captain Sharp ; and that Mr Ringrose, who 
everywhere admires his conduct and extols his actions to the 
skies — yea, and was present himself and concerned in the same 
affairs — did mean nothing else than to traduce his own and 
Captain Sharp's name as infamous unto posterity. For my 
part, I judge myself so far distant from blemishing^ in the 
least or disparaging Sir Henry Morgan or his heroic actions, 
that I believe I have showed myself to be the greatest admirer 
of his personal valour and conduct — yea, I think I have done 
more towards the advantage both of the honour and credit of 
that great commander, by soliciting and pubHshing that trans- 
lation, than all the authors of our English nation besides. And 
I could unfeignedly wish that these persons who pretend to be 
so passionate for Sir Henry Morgan and his huge deserts as 
to misinterpret the sincere respects and service I have en- 
deavoured to perform unto his merits would outdo that I have 
already done in this particular, and give us either a more full, 
exact, and true account of his exploits, or the best panegyric 
of his prowess that ever was written ; and then experiment 
whether I did not readily embrace the printing such a thing 
at my own cost and charge, or rather render them ten thousand 
thanks for his commendations than carp at their actions for 
perusing and printing the same. 

^ Aspersing : cf. Mrs. Hutchinson, Memoirs of Col. Hutchinson, ed. 
1846, p. 51 : " Blemish not a man that is innocent." 



THE PREFACE TO THE READER 293 

For what if the French or Dutch author of the History of 
the Buccaneers did mistake himself in two or three points re- 
lating to Sir Henry Morgan ? Must therefore the Publisher 
be blamed for faithfully printing what was most faithfully 
translated ? Must the saddle be set upon the wrong horse, 
and the faults of the author be imputed unto the printer ? 
Thus, if Mr Ringrose should happen to commit any mistake 
in these present papers, that blame should be presently mine ; 
and happy should be all authors if so readily their errors could 
be discharged upon the Publishers. Besides, what authors can 
there be found so accurate in all things as not to be subject 
now and then to some little lapses of their pen ? Were it so 
in John Esquemeling ; as he ought to be pardoned for any 
small peccadillo shot wittingly nor willingly committed, con- 
cerning what he relates of Sir Henry Morgan, so am I hitherto 
persuaded that he never designed to offend that great person, 
or falsely traduce his memory in the least. My argument is : 
Because he himself had the hand of a private Buccaneer in 
those affairs, he himself was a sharer in those booties, an actor 
in those enterprizes, and could no more blame Sir Henry 
Morgan for leading unto those attempts than blemish him- 
self for following unto them. Another reason, even more 
prevalent, is that he all along speaks more honourably of Sir 
Henry Morgan than of any other Commander of the Bucca- 
neers though they were his own countrymen, either Francis 
L'Ollonais or Roche BrasiHano, whereof the one was a Dutch- 
man and the other was born in France. So that to say that 
he represents the EngHsh Buccaneers as the worst of men is 
plainly to forget that he relates ten times greater villainies of 
his own nation and countrypeople ; and that the partiality 
they accuse him of, if any such can be found in that author, 
is rather bent against the French and other nations than the 
EngHsh. Does he in any place of his History lay all the faults 
and cruelties of the English Buccaneers upon Sir Henry 
Morgan ? Or do we believe that, if committed without order, 
as in most armies many things are so done, the General or 
Commander-in-Chief ought to be accountable for them ? Or, 
if those things were performed by order, that the Spaniards 
had not deserved them at the hands of the Buccaneers ? 

Aye, but he mistakes the pedigree of Sir Henry Morgan. 
Truly a great fault, and unpardonable in John Esquemehng, 



2 94 THE PREFACE TO THE READER 

a foreigner to our nation and an illiterate Buccaneer, that he 
should not be better read in our English history ! So did he 
also mistake his very name, calling him Captain John Morgan 
(for Henry) ; but that fault was rectified in the translation. 
As if every private soldier ought to be thoroughly acquainted 
with the Christian name of his General, and know whether he 
was baptized John or Thomas, Richard or William ! Now 
what dishonour can it be refuted unto the merits of Sir Henry 
Morgan to be misrepresented by John Esquemeling, for the 
son of a rich yeoman in Wales, whereas at the same time he 
says that he was of good quality in that country even as most 
who bear that name in Wales are known to be ? Does not 
all our English nation know the family of the Morgans to be 
one of the ancientest and best qualified in all Wales or England, 
and that to be descended of a rich yeoman of the same family 
is as great an honour and as honourable a pedigree as any 
private gentleman needs to pretend to ? 

But then Sir Henry Morgan did not burn Panama. And 
what disgrace was it to that worthy person if he had set fire 
unto it, for those reasons he knew best himself ? Certainly 
no greater dishonour than to take and plunder the said city. 
Thus are all these persons so far transported with passion 
towards Sir Henry Morgan as to bereave him of the glory of 
his greatest actions, whether true or false. For, whether he 
fired the town or not (for that question I shall not make mine), 
this I am sure, that it was constantly so reported and be- 
lieved here in England, viz. that the English had set fire unto it, 
that unto this day the Buccaneers do believe it to be so ; and 
consequent unto this belief Mr Ringrose in these papers says 
plainly in some place or other that Panama was once burnt 
by Sir Henry Morgan ; that the Spaniards themselves never 
believed or reported this fact otherwise, neither will they easily 
be persuaded to the contrary unto this very day, as I am 
credibly informed by those persons who lived in Spain at the 
same time that the news of the taking of Panama was brought 
into Spain, and who have been resident there many years since. 
For what concerns what now is published that the Governor 
of Panama fired the town himself is rather believed by the 
Spaniards to be a sham of the Governor's making — thereby 
to save his own bacon — against whom they rail as the greatest 
coward that ever was, for deserting the town and flying to the 



THE PREFACE TO THE READER 295 

mountains at the approach of the EngUsh. How then, say 
they, could he fire it himself, or give orders to have it fired, 
when we know he was upon the spur 30 or 40 miles distant 
from there ? Had he done it, he would have set fire unto every 
house before he had left the town and not so many hours after 
the English were in possession of the place and be at such a 
distance from it. Thus, both the English nation and the 
Spanisli having agreed to give the honour of this action, either 
truly or falsely, to Sir Henry Morgan, I cannot but admire 
that those who pretend to be the greatest admirers of his 
merits should endeavour to divest him of it. 

What concerns two or three points more relating to Sir 
Henry Morgan in the History of the Buccaneers : I shall not 
undertake to apologize for John Esquemeling, in case he has 
misrepresented them. All I shall say is this : that that worthy 
person is not the first General or Chief Commander whose 
actions have been misconstrued or misunderstood by the 
common soldiers, and consequently ill represented by them 
at home. Neither is anything in this world more subject to 
glosses and false representations than the heroic actions of 
great men by their servants or inferiors. If this be the case 
of John Esquemeling, and that he was mal-contented with his 
fortune at Panama, what is that to me ? What fault was that 
of mine ? Meanwhile, why have not these persons so zealous 
of the honour of Sir Henry Morgan given us the true Journal 
of his huge exploits, but rather suffer his famous actions to lie 
dormant for so many years in England at the same time that 
other nations have published them abroad ? And then why 
must I be blamed by these persons, his admirers, for doing 
for the renown of Sir Henry Morgan what I could, if I could 
not do so much as I would willingly have done ? 

[The Publisher]. 



PART IV 



CHAPTER I 



Captain Coxon, Sawkins, Sharp, and others set forth in a fleet 
towards the province ofDarien, upon the continent of America. 
Their designs to pillage and plunder in those parts. Number 
of their ships, and strength of their forces by sea and land 

At a place called Boca del Toro was the general rendezvous 
of the fleet, which lately had taken and sacked Porto Bello 
the second time — that rich place having been taken once 
before, under the conduct of Sir Henry Morgan, as is related 
in the History of the Buccaneers. At this place also were 
two other vessels, the one belonging to Captain Peter Harris, 
and the other to Captain Richard Sawkins ; both Englishmen 
and privateers. Here, therefore, a report was made to the 
fleet of a peace concluded between the Spaniards and the 
Indians of the land of Darien, who for the most part wage 
incessant wars against one another. Also, that since the 
conclusion of the said peace they had been already tried 
and found very faithful unto Captain Bournano, a French 
commander, in an attempt on a certain place called Chepo, 
near the South Sea. Further, that the Indians had promised 
to conduct him to a great and very rich place named Toca- 
mora ; upon which he had hkewise promised them to return 
in three months time with more ships and men. Hereupon 
we all agreed to go and visit the said place, and thus dispersed 
ourselves into several coves (by the Spaniards called cuevas, 
or hollow creeks under the coasts), there to careen and fit 
our vessels for that purpose. In this place, Boca del Toro, 

297 



2 98 THE FLEET SETS FORTH 

we found plenty of fat tortoises, the pleasantest meat in the 
world. When we had refitted our vessels, we met at an island 
called by us the Water-key ; and this was then our strength, 
as follows : — 





Tons 


Guns 


Men 


Captain Coxon, in a 


ship of 80 


8 


97 


Captain Harris 


150 


25 


107 


Captain Bournano 


90 


6 


86 


Captain Sawkins 


16 


I 


35 


Captain Sharp 


25 


2 


40 


Captain Cook 


35 





43 


Captain Alleston 


18 





24 


Captain Row 


20 





25 


Captain Mackett 


14 





20 



We sailed thence March 23rd, 1679, and in our way touched 
at the islands called Samballas. These are certain islands, 
reaching eight leagues in extent and lying fourteen leagues 
Westward of the river of Darien. Being here at anchor, 
many of the Indians, both men and women, came to see us. 
Some brought plantains, others other fruits and venison, to 
exchange with us for beads, needles, knives, or any trifling 
bauble whereof they stand in need. But what they most 
chiefly covet are axes and hatchets to fell timber withal. 
The men here go almost naked, as having only a sharp and 
hollow tip, made either of gold, silver, or bark, into which 
they thrust their privy members, which tip they fasten with 
a string about their middle. They wear as an ornament in 
their noses a golden or silver plate, in shape like a half-moon, 
which, when they drink, they hold up with one hand while 
they lift the cup with the other. They paint themselves 
sometimes with streaks of black ; as the women do in like 
manner with red. These have in their noses a pretty thick 
ring of gold or silver ; and for clothing they cover themselves 
with a blanket. They are generally well-featured women : 
among them I saw several fairer than the fairest of Europe, 
with hair like the finest flax. Of these it is reported they can 
see far better in the dark than in the light. 

These Indians mishked our design for Tocamora, and 
dissuaded us from it, asserting it would prove too tedious 
a march, and the way so mountainous and uninhabited that 
it would be extremely difficult to get provisions for our men. 
Withal they proffered to guide us, undescried, within a few 



THE SAMBALLAS ISLANDS 299 

leagues of the city of Panama, in case we were pleased to go 
thither, where we could not choose but ourselves know we 
should not fail of making a good voyage. Upon these and 
other reasons which they gave us, we concluded to desist 
from the journey of Tocamora and to proceed to Panama. 
Having taken these resolutions, Captain Bournano's and 
Captain Row's vessels separated from us, as being all French 
and not willing to go to Panama, they declaring themselves 
generally against a long march by land. Thus we left them 
at the Samballas. Thence an Indian Captain, or Chief Com- 
mander, named Andraeas, conducted us to another island 
called by the English The Golden Island, situated somewhat 
to the Westward of the mouth of the great river of Darien. 
At this island we met, being in all seven sail, on April 3rd, 
1680. 

Here at The Golden Island the Indians gave us notice of 
a town called Santa Maria, situated on a great river which 
bears the same name and which runs into the South Sea by 
the Gulf of San Miguel. In the town was kept a garrison of 
400 soldiers ; and from this place much gold was carried to 
Panama which was gathered from the mountains thereabouts. 
In case we should not find sufficient purchase there, we might 
thence proceed by sea to Panama, where we could not easily 
fail of our designs. This motion of the Indians we liked so 
well that we landed 331 men, on April 5th, 1680, leaving 
Captains Alleston and Mackett with a party of seamen to 
guard our ships in our absence with which we intended to 
return home. 

The men that were landed had each of them three or four 
cakes of bread (called by the English doughboys i) for their 
provision of victuals ; and for drink the rivers afforded 
enough. At the time of our landing Captain Sharp was 
very faint and weak, having had a great fit of sickness lately, 
from which he had scarcely recovered. Our several com- 
panies that marched were distinguished as follows. First, 

1 A nautical term for hard dumplings boiled in sea-water : cf. 
Dampier, Voyages (1697), ed. 1729, i, 5, 1 10 : " This we served instead 
of butter, to eat with the Dough-boys or dumplins." Still in use in the 
navy : cf. Pall Mall Budget, 22 Aug., 1887, p. 13, col. 2 : " Each man 
had also a dough-boy made with J lb. of flour and boiled in the soup." 
The modern use of the word to designate an American private soldier 
refers to the shape of the buttons on his tunic. 



30O PROVISIONS AND COLOURS 

Captain Bartholomew Sharp with his company had a red 
flag, with a bunch of white and green ribbons. The second 
division, led by Captain Richard Sawkins with his men, had 
a red flag striped with yellow. The third and fourth, led by 
Captain Peter Harris, had two green flags, his company being 
divided into two several divisions. The fifth and sixth, led 
by Captain John Coxon, who had some of AUeston's and 
Mackett's men joined to his, made two divisions or companies, 
and had each of them a red flag. The seventh was led by 
Captain Edmund Cook, with red colours striped with yellow, 
with a hand and sword for his device. All or most of them 
were armed with fuzee, pistol, and hanger. 



CHAPTER II 

They march towards the town of Santa Maria with design to 
take it. The Indian King of Darien meets them by the 
way. Difficulties of this march, with other occurrences till 
they arrive at the place 

Being landed on the coast of Darien, and divided into com- 
panies as was mentioned in the preceding chapter, we began 
our march towards Santa Maria, the Indians serving us for 
guides in that unknown country. Thus we marched at first 
through a small skirt of a wood, and then over a bay almost 
a league in length. After that, we went two leagues directly 
up a woody valley, where we saw here and there an old 
plantation, and had a very good path to march in. There 
we came to the side of a river, which in most places was dry, 
and built us houses, or rather huts, to lodge in. 

Unto this place came to us another Indian, who was a 
chief commander and a man of great parts, named Captain 
Antonio. This Indian officer encouraged us very much to 
undertake the journey to Santa Maria, and promised to be 
our leader, saying he would go along with us now but that 
his child lay very sick. However, he was assured it would 
die by the next day, and then he would most certainly follow 
and overtake us. Withal he desired we would not lie in the 
grass for fear of monstrous adders, which are very frequent 
in those places. Breaking some of the stones that lay in the 
river, we found them shine with sparks of gold. These stones 
are driven down from the neighbouring mountains in time 
of floods. This day four of our men tired, and returned to 
the ships. So we remained in all 327 men, with 6 Indians to 
conduct us. That night some showers of rain fell. 

The next day of our march we mounted a very steep hill, 
and on the other side at the foot thereof we rested on the 

301 



302 THIRD DAY'S MARCH 

bank of a river, which Captain Andraeas told us ran into the 
South Sea, being the same river on which the town of Santa 
Maria was situated. Hence we continued our march until 
noon, and then ascended another mountain very much 
higher than the former. Here we ran much danger often- 
times and in many places, the mountain being so perpendicular 
and the path so narrow that but one man at a time could pass. 
We arrived by the dark of the evening to the other side of the 
mountain, and lodged again by the side of the same river, 
having marched that day, according to our reckoning, about 
i8 miles. This night likewise some rain fell. 

The next morning being April 7th, we marched all along 
the river aforementioned, crossing it often, almost at every 
half-mile, sometimes up to the knees and at other times up 
to the middle in a very swift current. About noon we came 
to a place where we found some Indian houses. These were 
very large and neat : the sides were built with cabbage-trees, 
and the roofs of wild canes thatched with palmetto royal, 
but far neater than ours at Jamaica. They had many divisions 
into rooms, though no ascent by stairs into chambers. At 
this place were four of these houses together, that is, within 
a stone's throw one of another, each of them having a large 
plantain-walk before it. At the distance of half-a-mile from 
this place lived the King or chief Captain of these Indians 
of Darien, who came to visit us in royal robes with his queen 
and family. His crown was made of small white reeds, which 
were curiously woven, having no other top than its lining, 
which was of red silk. Round about the middle of it was 
a thin plate of gold, more than two-inches broad, laced 
behind — whence did stick two or three ostrich-feathers. 
About this plate went also a row of golden beads, which were 
bigger than ordinary peas ; underneath which the red lining of 
the crown was seen. In his nose he wore a large plate of gold 
in the form of a half-moon, and in each ear a great golden 
ring, nearly four-inches in diameter, with a round thin plate of 
gold of the same breadth, having a small hole in the centre 
by which it hung to the ring. He was covered with a thin, 
white, cotton robe, reaching to the small of his legs, and round 
its bottom a fringe of the same, three-inches deep. So that 
by the length of this robe our sight was impeded, that we could 
see no higher than his naked ankles. In his hand he had a 



FOURTH DAY'S MARCH 303 

long bright lance, as sharp as any knife. With him he had 
three sons, each of them having a white robe, and their lances 
in their hands, but standing bareheaded before him ; as also 
were eight or nine persons more of his retinue, or guard. His 
queen wore a red blanket, which was closely girt about her 
waist, and another that came loosely over her head and 
shoulders, like our old-fashioned striped hangings. She had 
a young child in her arms, and two daughters walked by her, 
both marriageable, with their faces almost covered with stripes 
or streaks of red, and almost laden about their neck and arms 
with small beads of several colours. These Indian women of 
the province of Darien are generally very free, airy, and 
brisk, yet withal very modest, and cautious in their husbands' 
presence, of whose jealousy they stand in fear. With these 
Indians we made an exchange, or had a truck as it is called, 
for knives, pins, needles, or any other such like trifles ; but 
in our deaUng with them we found them to be very cunning. 
Here we rested ourselves for the space of one day, and withal 
chose Captain Sawkins to lead the Forlorn, to whom, for that 
purpose, we gave the choice of four-score men. The King 
ordered us each man to have three plantains, with sugar- 
canes to suck, by way of a present. But, when these were 
consumed, if we could not truck we must have starved, for 
the king himself did not refuse to deal for his plantains. 
This sort of fruit is first reduced to mash, then laid between 
leaves of the same tree, and so used with water ; after which 
preparation they call it miscelaw. 

On April 9th we continued our march along the banks of 
the river above-mentioned, finding on our way here and there 
a house. The owners of the said houses would most com- 
monly stand at the door, and give, as we passed by, to every 
one of us either a ripe plantain or some sweet cassava-root. 
Some of them would count us by dropping a grain of corn 
for each man that passed before them, for they know no 
greater number, nor can count no farther, than twenty. 
That night we arrived at three great Indian houses, where 
we took up our lodgings, the weather being clear and serene 
all night. 

The next day Captain Sharp, Captain Coxon, and Captain 
Cook, with about threescore-and-ten of our men, embarked 
themselves in fourteen canoes upon the river, to glide down 



304 SIXTH DAY'S MARCH 

the stream. Among this number I also embarked, and we 
had in our company our Indian Captain Andraeas, of whom 
mention was made above, and two Indians more in each 
canoe, to pilot or guide us down the river. But, if we had been 
tired whilst travelling by land before, certainly we were 
in a worse condition now in our canoes. For at the distance 
of almost every stone's cast we were constrained to quit 
and get out of our boats, and haul them over either sands or 
rocks, and at other times over trees that lay across and filled 
up the river so that they hindered our navigation ; yea, 
several times over the very points of land itself. That very 
night we built ourselves huts for shelter upon the riverside, 
and rested our wearied limbs until next morning. 

This being come, we prosecuted our journey all day long 
with the same fatigue and toil as \ve had done the day before. 
At night came a tiger and looked on us for some while, but 
we did not dare to fire at the animal, fearing we should be 
descried by the sound of our fuzees — the Spaniards, as we 
were told, not being at any great distance from that place. 

But the next day, which was April 12th, our pain and 
labour was rather doubled than diminished — not only for the 
difficulties of the way, which were intolerable, but chiefly 
for the absence of our main body of men, from whom we had 
parted the day before. For now, hearing no news of them, 
we grew extremely jealous of the Indians and their councils, 
suspecting a design of those people thus to divide our forces 
and then, by cutting us off, to betray us to the Spaniards, our 
implacable enemies. That night we rested ourselves by 
building huts, as we had done and as has been mentioned 
before. 

On Tuesday morning, the next ensuing day, we continued 
our navigation down the river, and arrived at a beachy 
point of land, at which place another arm joins the same 
river. Here, as we understood, the Indians of Darien did 
usually rendezvous whensoever they drew up in a body with 
intention to fight their ancient enemies, the Spaniards. Here 
also we made a halt, or waited for the rest of our forces and 
company, the Indians having now sent to seek them, as being 
themselves not a little concerned at our dissatisfaction and 
jealousies. In the afternoon our companions came up with 
us, and were hugely glad to see us, they having been in no 



EIGHTH DAY'S MARCH 305 

less fear for us than we had been at the same time for them. 
We remained and rested there that night also, with design 
to fit our arms for action, which now, as we were told, was 
near at hand. 

We departed thence early the next morning, which was 
the last day of our march, having in all now the number of 
threescore-and-eight canoes, wherein were embarked 327 of 
us Englishmen, and 50 Indians, who served us for guides. 
To the point above-mentioned the Indians had hitherto 
guided our canoes with long poles or sticks ; but now we 
made ourselves oars and paddles to row with, thus to make 
what speed we could. Thus we rowed with all haste imagin- 
able, and upon the river we happened to meet two or three 
Indian canoes that were laden with plantains. About mid- 
night we arrived and landed at the distance of half-a-mile 
more or less from the town of Santa Maria, whither our march 
was all along intended. The place where we landed was 
deeply muddy, insomuch that we were constrained to lay 
our paddles on the mud to wade upon, and withal lift our- 
selves up by the boughs of the trees to support our bodies 
from sinking. Afterwards we were forced to cut our way 
through the woods for some space, where we took up our 
lodgings for that night, for fear of being discovered by the 
enemy, to whom we were so near. 



CHAPTER III 

They take the town of Santa Maria with no loss of men, and hut 
small booty of what they fought for. Description of the 
place, country, and river adjacent. They resolve to go and 
plunder for the second time the city of Panama 

The next morning, which was Thursday, April 15th, about 
break of day, we heard from the town a small arm discharged, 
and after that a drum beating a travailler. With this we were 
roused from our sleep, and, taking up our arms, we put our- 
selves in order and marched towards the town. As soon as 
we came out of the woods into the open ground, we were 
descried by the Spaniards, who had received inteUigence 
beforehand of our coming, and were prepared to receive us, 
having already conveyed away all their treasure of gold and 
sent it to Panama. They ran immediately into a large 
palisaded fort, having each pale or post twelve-foot high, and 
began to fire very briskly at us as we came. But our vanguard 
ran up to the place, and, pulling down two or three of their 
palisades, entered the fort incontinently, and made themselves 
masters thereof. In this action not fifty of our men had come 
up before the fort was taken, and on our side only two were 
wounded, and not one killed. Notwithstanding, within the 
place were found two hundred and three-score men, besides 
which number two-hundred others were said to be absent, 
having gone up into the country to the mines to fetch down 
gold, or rather to convey away what was already in the town. 
This golden treasure comes down another branch of this 
river to Santa Maria from the neighbouring mountains, where 
are thought to be the richest mines of the Indies, or at least 
of all these parts of the Western world. Of the Spaniards we 
killed in the assault 26, and wounded to the number of 16 
more. But their governor, their priest, and all or most of 
their chief men made their escape by flight. 

306 



REDEMPTION OF KING'S DAUGHTER 307 

Ha.ving taken the fort, we expected to find here a consider- 
able town belonging to it. But it proved to be only some 
wild houses made of cane, the place being chiefly a garrison 
designed to keep in subjection the Indians, who bear a mortal 
hatred towards, and are often apt to rebel against, the 
Spaniards. But, bad as the place was, our fortune was much 
worse. For we came only three days too late to meet with 
three-hundred-weight of gold, which was carried thence to 
Panama in a bark that is sent thence twice or thrice every 
year to fetch the gold brought to Santa Maria from the 
mountains. This river, called by the name of the town, is 
hereabouts twice as broad as the river Thames at London, 
and flows above three-score miles upwards, rising to the 
height of two-fathom-and-a-half at the town itself. As soon 
as we had taken the place, the Indians who belonged to our 
company and had served us for guides came up to the town. 
For whilst they heard the noise of the guns they were in 
great consternation and dared not approach the palisades, 
but hid themselves closely in a small hollow, so that the 
bullets, while we were fighting, flew over their heads. 

Here we found and redeemed the eldest daughter of the 
King of Darien, of whom we made mention above. She had, 
as it should seem, been forced away from her father's house 
by one of the garrison (which rape had hugely incensed him 
against the Spaniards), and was with child by him. After 
the fight the Indians destroyed as many of the Spaniards as 
we had done in the assault, by taking them into the adjoining 
woods and there stabbing them to death with their lances. 
But, so soon as we learnt of this barbarous cruelty, we 
hindered them from taking any more out of the fort, where 
we confined them every one prisoners. Captain Sawkins, 
with a small party of ten more, put himself into a canoe and 
went down the river, to pursue and stop, if it were possible, 
those that had escaped, for they were the chief people of the 
town and garrison. But now, our great expectations of taking 
a huge booty of gold at this place being totally vanished, we 
were unwilling to have come so far for nothing, or to go back 
empty-handed, especially considering what vast riches were 
to be had at no great distance. Hereupon we resolved to go 
to Panama, [in] which place, if we could take [it], we were 
assured we should get treasure enough to satisfy our hungry 



3o8 CAPTURE OF SANTA MARIA 

appetite for gold and riches, that city being the receptacle 
of all the plate, jewels, and gold that is dug out of the mines 
of all Potosi and Peru. Unto this effect, therefore, and to 
please the humours of some of our company, we made choice 
of Captain Coxon as our General or Commander-in-chief. 
Before our departure we sent back what small booty we had 
taken here by some prisoners under the charge of twelve of 
our men, to convey it to the ships. 

Thus we prepared to go forward on that dangerous enter- 
prise of Panama. But the Indians who had conducted us 
having got from us what knives, scissors, axes, needles, and 
beads they could, would not stay any longer, but all, or the 
greater part of them, returned to their home. Which not- 
withstanding, the king himself. Captain Andraeas, Captain 
Antonio, the king's son, called by the Spaniards Bonete de 
Oro, or King Golden-Cap, as also his kinsman, would not be 
persuaded by their falHng off to leave us, but resolved to go 
to Panama, out of the desire they had to see that place taken 
and sacked. Yea, the king promised, if there should be 
occasion, to join 50,000 men to our forces. Besides which 
promises, we had also another very considerable encourage- 
ment to undertake this journey. For the Spaniard who had 
forced away the king's daughter, as was mentioned above, 
fearing lest we should leave him to the mercy of the Indians, 
who would have but little mercy on him, having shown 
themselves so cruel to the rest of his companions, for the safety 
of his Hfe had promised to lead us not only into the town but 
even to the very bedchamber door of the governor of Panama, 
and that we should take him by the hand and seize both him 
and the whole city before we should be discovered by the 
Spaniards, either before or after our arrival. 



CHAPTER IV 

The Buccaneers leave the town of Santa Maria, and proceed by 
sea to take Panama. Extreme difficulties, with sundry acci- 
dents and dangers of thai voyage 

Having been in possession of the town of Santa Maria only 
the space of two days, we departed thence on Saturday, 
April 17th, 1680. We all embarked in 35 canoes and a peri- 
agua^, which we had taken here lying at anchor before the 
town. Thus we sailed, or rather rowed, down the river in quest 
of the South Sea, upon which Panama is seated, towards the 
Gulf of Ballona, whereat we were to disembogue^ into that 
ocean. Our prisoners, the Spaniards, begged very earnestly 
that they might be permitted to go with us and not be left 
to the mercy of the Indians, who would show them no favour 
and whose cruelty they so much feared. But we had much 
ado to find a sufficient number of boats for ourselves, the 
Indians that left us having taken with them, either by consent 
or stealth, so many canoes. Yet, notwithstanding this, they 
found soon after either bark logs, or old canoes, and by that 
means shifted so well for their lives as to come along with us. 
Before our departure we burnt both the fort, the church, and 
the town, which was done at the request of the King, he being 
extremely incensed against it. 

Among these canoes it was my misfortune to have one that 
was very heavy, and consequently sluggish. By this means 
we were left behind the rest a little way, there being only four 

* A corruption of Span, piragua, a West-Indian canoe, a pirogue : 
cf. "... six peryagoes, which are huge great trees formed as your 
canowes, yut so laid out on the sides with boords, they will seeme like 
a little gaily." Capt. John Smith, Works [1629] (edn. 1884, p. 901). 

* Discharge from the mouth — from Span, desembocar. Cf. Beaumont 
and Fletcher, Knight of Malta [c. 1626], i, 3 : " My ships ride in thg 
bay ready to disembogiie." 

309 



3IO BUCCANEERS LEAVE SANTA MARIA 

men besides myself that were embarked therein. As the tide 
fell, it left several shoals of sand naked, and hence, we not 
knowing of the true channel amongst such a variety of streams, 
happened to steer within a shoal for above two miles before 
we perceived our error. Hereupon we Were forced to lay by 
until high water came, for to row in such heavy boats against 
the tide is totally impossible. As soon as the tide began 
to turn, we rowed away in prosecution of our voyage, and 
withal made what haste we could ; but all our endeavours 
were in vain, for we could neither find nor overtake our com- 
panions. Thus at about ten o'clock at night, the tide being 
low, we stuck up an oar in the river, and slept by turns in 
our canoe, several showers of rain falling all the night long 
which pierced us to the skin. 

But, the next morning, no sooner had day come than we 
rowed away down the river as before, in pursuit of our people. 
Having gone about the space of two leagues, we were so 
fortunate as to overtake them. For they had lain that night 
at an Indian hut, or embarcadero, that is to say landing place, 
and had been taking in water till then. Being arrived at the 
place, they told us that we must not omit to fill our jars 
there with water, otherwise we should meet with none in the 
space of six days' time. Hereupon we went every one of us 
the distance of a quarter-of-a-mile from the embarcadero to 
a little pond to fill our water in calabashes, making what haste 
we could back to our canoe. But, when we returned, we 
found not one of our men, they all being departed and already 
got out of sight. Such is the procedure of these wild men 
that they care not in the least whom they lose of their com- 
pany or leave behind. We were now more troubled in our 
minds than before, fearing lest we should fall into the same 
misfortune we had so lately overcome. 

Hereupon we rowed after them as fast as we possibly could, 
but ail in vain. For here are found such huge numbers of 
islands, greater and lesser, as also quays about the mouth of 
the river, that it was not diificult for us, who were un- 
acquainted with the river, to lose ourselves a second time 
amongst them. Yet notwithstanding, though with much 
trouble and toil, we found at last that mouth of the river 
that is called by the Spaniards Boca Chica, or The Little 
Mouth. But, as it happened, it was now young flood, and the 



A TEDIOUS NIGHT 311 

stream ran very violently against us ; so that, though we were 
not above a stone's cast from the said mouth, and this was 
witliin a league broad, yet we could not by any means come 
near it. Hence we were forced to put ashore, which we did 
accordingly, until high-water. We hauled our canoe close 
by the bushes, and, when we got out, we fastened our rope 
to a tree, which the tide had almost covered, for it flows 
here nearly four-fathom deep. 

As soon as the tide began to turn, we rowed away from 
there to an island, distant about a league and a half from the 
mouth of the river, in the Gulf of San Miguel. Here in the 
gulf it went very hard with us whensoever any wave dashed 
against the sides of our canoe, for it was nearly twenty-feet 
in length and yet not quite one-foot-and-a-half in breadth 
where it was at the broadest, so that we had only just room 
enough to sit down in her, and a little water would easily have 
both filled and overwhelmed us. At the island aforesaid we 
took up our resting-place for that night, though it was, from 
the loss of our company and the great dangers we were in, 
the sorrowfullest night that until then I had ever experienced 
in my whole life. For it rained impetuously all night long, 
insomuch that we were wet from head to foot and had not 
one dry thread about us ; neither, through the violence of 
the rain, were we able to keep any fire burning wherewith 
to warm or dry ourselves. The tide ebbs here a good half- 
mile from the mark of high-water, and leaves bare wonderfully 
high and sharp-pointed rocks. We passed this heavy and 
tedious night without one minute of sleep, being all very 
sorrowful to see ourselves so far and remote from the rest of 
our companions, as also totally destitute of all human com- 
fort ; for a vast sea surrounded us on one side and the mighty 
power of our enemies, the Spaniards, on the other. Neither 
could we descry at any hand the least thing to relieve us, all 
that we could see being the wide sea, high mountains, and 
rocks ; while we ourselves were confined to an egg-shell, 
instead of a boat, without so much as a few clothes to defend 
us from the injuries of the weather. For at that time none of 
us had a shoe to our feet. We searched the whole quay to 
see if we could find any water, but found none. 



CHAPTER V 

Shipwreck of Mr Rmgrose, the author of this narrative. He 
is taken by the Spaniards, and miraculously by them pre- 
served. Several other accidents and disasters which befell 
him after the loss of his companiojis till he found them again. 
Description of the Gulf of Vallona 

On Monday, April 19th, at break of day, we hauled our 
canoe into the water again, and departed from the island 
aforementioned : wet and cold as we were, we rowed away 
towards the Punta de San Lorenzo, or Point St Lawrence. 
In our way we met with several islands which lie straggling 
thereabouts. But now we were again so hard put to it by 
the smallness of our vessel and being in an open sea, that it had 
become the work of one man, yea sometimes of two, to cast 
out the water, which came in on all sides of our canoe. After 
struggling for some time with these difficulties, as we came 
near one of those islands a heavy sea overturned our boat, 
by which means we were all forced to swim for our lives. But 
we soon got to the shore, and to the same place our canoe 
came tumbling after us. Our arms were very fast lashed 
to the inside of the boat, and our locks were as well cased 
and waxed down as was possible ; so were also our cartouche- 
boxes and powder-horns. But all our bread and fresh water 
was utterly spoilt and lost. 

Our canoe being tumbled on shore by the force of the waves, 
our first business was to take out and clear our arms. This 
we had scarcely done when we saw another canoe fall into the 
same misfortune at a little distance to leeward of us, amongst 
a great number of rocks that bounded the island. The 
persons that were cast away proved to be six Spaniards of 
the garrison of Santa Maria, who had found an old canoe 
and had followed us to escape the cruelty of the Indians. 

312 



SHIPWRECK OF MR RINGROSE 313 

They presently came to us, and made us a fire ; which being 
done, we got our meat and broiled it on the coals, and all 
of us ate amicably together. But we stood in great need of 
water, or other drink to our victuals, not knowing in the 
least where to get any. Our canoe was thrown up by the 
waves to the edge of the water, and there was no great fear 
of its splitting, being full six inches in thickness, on the sides 
thereof. But that in which the Spaniards came split itself 
against the rocks, being old and slender, into an hundred 
pieces. Though we were thus shipwrecked and driven ashore, 
as I have related, yet otherwise and at other times is this 
Gulf of San Miguel a mere mill-pond for smoothness of water. 

My company was now altogether for returning and pro- 
ceeding no farther, but rather for living amongst the Indians, 
in case we could not reach the ships we had left behind us 
in the Northern Sea. But with much ado I prevailed with 
them to go forward at least one day longer, and, in case we 
found not our people the next day, that then I would be willing 
to do anything which they should think fit. Thus we spent 
two or three hours of the day in consulting about our affairs, 
and withal keeping a man to watch and look out on all sides 
for fear of any surprisal by the Indians or other enemies. 
About the time that we were come to a conclusion in our debates, 
our watchman by chance spied an Indian, who, as soon as 
he saw us, ran into the woods. I sent immediately two of 
my company after him, who overtook him, and found that he 
was one of our friendly Indians. Thus he led them to a place 
not far distant where seven more of his company were with 
a great canoe which they had brought with them. They came 
to the place where I was with the rest of my company, and 
seemed to be glad to meet us on that island. I asked them by 
signs for the main body of our company, and they gave me 
to understand that if we would go with them in their canoe, 
which was much bigger than ours, we should be up with the 
party by the next morning. This news, as may easily be 
supposed, not a little rejoiced our hearts. 

Presently, after this friendly invitation, they asked who 
the other six men were whom they saw in our company, for 
they easily perceived us not to be all of one and the same coat 
and lingua. We told them they were ' Wankers ', which is 
the name they commonly give to the Spaniards in their own 



314 SHIPWRECK OF MR RINGROSE 

language. Their next question was, if they should kill those 
Spaniards ; but I answered them : No, by no means ; I would 
not consent to have it done. With which answer they seemed 
to be satisfied for the present. But, a Uttle while after, my 
back being turned, my company thinking that they should 
thereby oblige the Indians, beckoned to them to kill the 
Spaniards. With this the poor creatures, perceiving the 
danger that threatened them, made a sad shriek and outcry, 
and I came in time to save all their hves. But withal I was 
forced to give way and consent that they should have one 
of them for to make their slave. Hereupon I gave the canoe 
that I came in to the five Spaniards remaining, and bid them 
get away and shift for their lives, lest those cruel Indians 
should not keep their word, and they should run the same 
danger again they had so lately escaped. Having sent them 
away whilst I rested myself here, I took a survey of this 
gulf and the mouth of the river, which I finished the same 
day, and do here present to the view of the reader. 

But now, thanks be to God, joining company with those 
Indians, we got into a very large canoe, which for its bigness 
was better able to carry twenty men than our own that we had 
brought to carry five. The Indians had also fitted a very 
good sail to the said canoe, so that, having now a fresh and 
strong gale of wind, we set sail thence, and made therewith 
brave way, to the infinite joy and comfort of our hearts, 
seeing ourselves so well accommodated and so happily rid 
of the miseries we but lately had endured. We had now a 
smooth and easy passage after such tedious and laboursome 
pains as we had sustained in coming so far since w^e left Santa 
Maria. Under the point of St Lawrence, mentioned above, 
is a very great rippling of the sea, occasioned by a strong 
current which runs hereabouts, and which often alm.ost filled 
our boat with its dashes as we sailed. This evening, after 
our departure from the island where we were cast away, it 
rained vehemently for several hours, and the night proved 
to be very dark. About nine o'clock that night we descried 
two fires on the shore of the continent over against us. These 
fires were no sooner perceived by the Indians of our canoe 
than they began to shout for joy and cry out. Captain Antonio, 
Captain Andrceas, the names of their Indian Captains and 
leaders ; and to affirm they were assured those fires were made 



CAPTURED BY SPANIARDS 



315 



by their companions. Hence they made for the shore towards 
those fires as fast as they could drive. But, so soon as our 
canoe came among the breakers nigh the shore, out came 
from the woods about three-score Spaniards with clubs and 
other arms, and, laying hold of our canoe on both sides thereof, 
hauled it out of the water quite dry ; so that by this means 
we were all suddenly taken and made their prisoners. I 
laid hold of my gun, thinking to make some defence for my- 
self ; but all was in vain, for they suddenly seized me between 




four or five of them and hindered me from action. Meanwhile 
our Indians leaped overboard, and got away very nimbly 
into the woods, my companions standing amazed at what 
had happened and the manner of our surprisal. I asked 
them presently if any of them could speak either French or 
English ; but they answered : No. Hereupon, as well as 
I could I discoursed to some of them, who were more intelli- 
gent than the rest, in Latin, and by degrees came to under- 
stand their condition. These were Spaniards who had been 



31 6 THEY ARE CIVILLY TREATED 

turned ashore here by our EngHsh party, who left them upon 
this coast lest by carrying them nearer to Panama any of 
them should make their escape and discover our march 
towards that city. They had me, presently after I was taken, 
into a small hut which they had built, covered with boughs, 
and made there great shouts for joy, because they had taken 
us, designing in their minds to use us very severely for coming 
into those parts, and especially for taking and plundering 
their town of Santa Maria. But, while the captain of those 
Spaniards was examining me, in came the poor Spaniard that 
was come along with us, and reported how kind I had been 
to him and the rest of his companions, by saving their lives 
from the cruelty of the Indians. 

The captain, having heard him, arose from his seat immedi- 
ately and embraced me, saying that we Englishmen were very 
friendly enemies and good people, but that the Indians were 
very rogues and a treacherous nation. Withal he desired me 
to sit down by him, and to eat part of such victuals as our 
companions had left them when they were turned ashore. 
Then he told me that for the kindness I had showed to his 
countrymen he gave us all our Hves and liberties, which other- 
wise he would certainly have taken from us. And, though 
he could scarcely be persuaded in his mind to spare the Indians' 
lives, yet for my sake he pardoned them all, and I should have 
them with me in case I could find them. Thus he bid me like- 
wise take my canoe, and go in God's name, saying withal he 
wished us as fortunate as we were generous. Hereupon I took 
my leave of him, after some little stay, though he invited me 
to tarry all night with him. I searched out, and at last found, 
my Indians, who for fear had hid themselves in the bushes 
adjoining to the neighbouring woods where they lay concealed. 
Having found them, the Captain led me very civilly down to 
the canoe, bidding my companions and the Indians get in 
after me : as they at first hauled us ashore, so now again they 
pushed us off to sea, by a sudden and strange vicissitude of 
fortune. All that night it rained very hard, as was men- 
tioned above ; neither durst we put ashore any more at any 
place, it being all along such as by mariners is commonly called 
an " iron coast ". 

The next morning being come, we sailed, and paddled, or 
rowed, till about ten o'clock. At which time we espied a 



THEY REJOIN THEIR COMPANY 317 

canoe making towards us with all speed imaginable. Being 
come up with us, and in view, it proved to be of our own 
EngHsh Company, who, mistaking our canoe for a Spanish 
periagua, was coming in all haste to attack us. We were 
infinitely glad to meet them, and they presently conducted 
us to the rest of our company, who were at that instant 
coming from a deep bay which lay behind a high point of 
rocks, where they had lain at anchor all that night and 
morning. We were all mutually rejoiced to see one another 
again, they having given both me and my companions up 
for lost. 



CHAPTER VI 

The Buccaneers prosecute their voyage, till they come within 
sight of Panama. They take several harks and prisoners 
by the way. Are descried by the Spaniards before their 
arrival. They order the Indians to kill the prisoners 

From the place where we rejoined our -EngHsh forces we all 
made our way towards a high hummock of land, as it appeared 
at a distance, but was nothing else than an island seven leagues 
distant from the bay aforementioned. On the highest part 
of this island the Spaniards keep a watch or ' look-out ' 
(for so it is termed by the seamen) for fear of pirates or other 
enemies. That evening we arrived at the island, and, being 
landed, went up a very steep place till we came to a little 
hut where the watchman lodged. We took by surprizal the 
old man who watched in the place but happened not to see 
us till we were got into his plantain walk before the lodge. 
He told us in his examination that we were not as yet descried 
by the Spaniards of Panama or any others that he knew, 
which relation of the old fellow much encouraged us to go 
forwards with our design of surprising that rich city. This 
place, if I took its name rightly, is called Parol de Plantanos, 
or, in English, Plantain-Watch. 

Here, not long before it was dark that evening, a certain 
bark came to an anchor at the outward side of the island 
which instantly was descried by us. Hereupon we speedily 
manned out two canoes, who went under the shore and 
surprised the said boat. Having examined the persons that 
were on board, we found she had been absent the space of 
eight days from Panama, and had landed soldiers at a point 
of land not far distant from this island, with intention to fight 
and curb certain Indians and negroes who had done much hurt 
in the country thereabouts. The bark being taken, most of 

318 



VOYAGE TO PANAMA CONTINUED 319 

our men endeavoured to get into her, but more especially 
those who had the lesser canoes. Thus there embarked 
thereon to the number of 137 of our company, together with 
that sea-artist and valiant commander, Captain Bartholomew 
Sharp. Witli him went also on board Captain Cook, whom 
we mentioned at the beginning of this history. The remaining 
part of that night we lay at the quay of the said island, 
expecting to prosecute our voyage the next day. 

Morning being come, I changed my canoe and embarked 
myself on another, which, though it was something lesser 
than the former, yet was furnished with better company. 
Departing from the island, we rowed all day long over shoal- 
water, at the distance of about a league from land, having 
sometimes not above four-foot water and white ground. 
In the afternoon we descried a bark at sea, and instantly 
gave her chase. But the canoe wherein was Captain Harris 
happened to come up the first with her, who, after a sharp 
dispute, took her. Being taken, we put on board the saSH 
bark 30 men. But the wind would not suffer the other bark, 
in chasing, to come up with us. This pursuit of the vessel 
did so far hinder us in our voyage, and divide us asunder, 
that, night soon coming on, we lost one another and could 
no longer keep in a body together. Hereupon we laid our 
canoe ashore, to take up our rest for that night at the distance 
of two miles, more or less, from high-water mark, and about 
four leagues to leeward of the island of Chepillo, to which 
place our course was then directed. 

The next morning, as soon as the water began to float us, 
we rowed away for the forementioned island Chepillo, where 
by assignation our general rendezvous was to be. On our 
way as we went, we spied another bark under sail, as we had 
done the day before. Captain Coxon's canoe was now the 
first that came up with this vessel. But, a young breeze 
freshening at that instant, she got away from him after the 
first onset, killing in the said canoe one Mr Bull and wounding 
two others. We presently conjectured that this bark would 
get before us to Panama, and give intelligence of our coming 
to those of the town ; all which happened as we had fore- 
seen. It was two o'clock in the afternoon before all our 
canoes could come together and join one another, as it was 
assigned at Chepillo. We took at that island fourteen prisoners, 



320 THE PRISONERS ESCAPE 

between negroes and mulattos ; also great store of plantains 
and good water, together with two fat hogs. But now, be- 
lieving that ere this we had been already descried at Panama 
by the bark aforementioned, we resolved among ourselves 
to waste no time, but to hasten away from the said island, 
to the intent we might at least be able to surprise and take 
their shipping, and by that means make ourselves masters of 
those seas, in case we could not get the town which now we 
judged almost impossible to be done. At Chepillo we took 
also a periagua which we found at anchor before the island, 
and presently we put some men on board her. Our stay 
here was only of few hours, so that about four o'clock in the 
evening, which now was coming on, we rowed away, designing 
to reach Panama before the next morning, to which place we 
had now only seven leagues to go, it being no farther distant 
from Chepillo. But, before we departed from the said island, 
it was judged convenient by our Commanders, for certain 
reasons which I could not dive into, to rid their hands of the 
prisoners which we had taken. And hereupon orders were 
given unto our Indians, who they knew would perform them 
very willingly, to fight, or rather to murder and slay, the said 
prisoners upon the shore, and that in view of the whole fleet. 
This they instantly went about to do, being glad of this 
opportunity to revenge their hatred against their enemies, 
though in cold blood. But the prisoners, although they had 
no arms wherewith to defend themselves, forced their way 
through those barbarous Indians, in spite of their lances, 
bows, and arrows, and got into the woods of the island, only 
one man of them being killed. We rowed all night long, 
though many showers of rain ceased not to fall. 



CHAPTER VII 

They arrive within sight of Panama. Are encountered by three 
small men-of-war. They fight them with only 68 fnen, and 
utterly defeat them, taking two of the said vessels. Description 
of that bloody fight. They take several ships at the isle of 
Perico before Panama 

The next morning, which was on April 23rd, 1680, that day 
being dedicated to St George, our Patron of England, we 
came before sunrise within view of the city of Panama, which 
makes a pleasant show to the vessels that are at sea from 
off the shore. Soon after we saw also the ships belonging 
to the said city which lay at anchor at an island called Perico, 
distant only two leagues from Panama. On the aforesaid 
island are to be seen several storehouses which are built 
there, to receive the goods dehvered out of the ships. At 
that present there lode at anchor at Perico five great ships 
and three pretty big barks, called Barcos de la Armadilla, 
or little men-of-war ; the word Armadilla signifying a Little 
Fleet. These had been suddenly manned with design to fight 
us, and prevent any further attempts we should make upon 
the city or coasts of those seas. As soon as they spied us, 
they instantly weighed anchor and got under sail, coming 
directly to meet us whom they expected very shortly, accord- 
ing to the intelligence they had received of our coming. Our 
two periaguas being heavy could not row so fast as we that 
were in the canoes, and hence we were got pretty far before 
them. In our five canoes (for so many we were now in com- 
pany) we had only 36 men, in a very unfit condition to fight, 
being tired with so much rowing, and so few in number in 
comparison with the enemy that came against us. They sailed 
towards us directly before the wind, insomuch that we feared 
lest they should run us down before it. Hereupon we rowed 
Y 321 



322 THE ENGAGEMENT 

up into the wind's eye, as the seamen term it, and got close 
to windward of them. While we were doing this, our lesser 
periaguas, in which were 32 or more of our company, came 
up with us. So that we were in all 68 men that were engaged 
in the fight of that day, the King himself, who was in the 
periagua aforementioned, being one of our number. In the 
vessel that was admiral of these three small men-of-war were 
fourscore and six Biscayners, who have the repute of being 
the best mariners and also the best soldiers amongst the 
Spaniards. These were all volunteers, who came designedly 
to show their valour, under the command of Don Jacinto de 
Barahona, who was High Admiral of those seas. In the 
second were 77 negroes, who were commanded by an old and 
stout Spaniard, a native of Andalusia in Spain, named Don 
Francisco de Peralta. In the third and last were 65 mestizos 
or mulattos or tawnymores, commanded by Don Diego de 
Carabaxal. So that in all they made the number of 228 men. 
The Commanders had strict orders given them, and their 
resolution was to give quarter to none of the Pirates or 
Buccaneers. But such bloody commands as these seldom 
or never do happen to prosper. 

The canoe of Captain Sawkins, and also that wherein I 
was, were much to leeward of the rest ; so that the ship of 
Don Diego de Carabaxal came between us two, and fired 
presently on me to windward, and on him to leeward, wound- 
ing with these broadsides four men in his canoe and one in 
that I was in ; but he paid so dear for his passage between 
us that he was not very quick in coming about again and 
making the same way. For we killed with our first volley 
of shot several of his men upon the decks. Thus we also 
got to windward, as the rest were before. At this time the 
Admiral of the Armadilla, or Little Fleet, came up with us 
suddenly, scarce giving us time to charge, and thinking to 
pass by us all with as little or less damage as the first of his 
ships had done. But, as it happened, it fell out much worse 
with him, for we were so fortunate as to kill the man at the 
helm, so that his ship ran into the wind, and her sails lay 
a-back, as is usually said in marinery. By this means we had 
time to come all up under his stern, and, firing continually 
into his vessel, we killed as many as came to the helm, besides 
which slaughter we cut asunder his main sheet and brace with 



THE ENGAGEMENT 323 

our shot. At this time the third vessel, in which Captain 
Peralta was, was coming up to the aid of their general. Here- 
upon Captain Sawkins, who had changed his canoe and was 
gone into the periagiia, left the Admiral to us four canoes (for 
his own was quite disabled) and met the said Peralta. Between 
him and Captain Sawkins the dispute, or fight, was very hot, 
lying board on board together, and both giving and receiving 
death unto each other as fast as they could charge. While 
we were thus engaged, the first ship tacked about, and came 
up to relieve the Admiral. But we, perceiving that and fore- 
seeing how hard it would go with us if we should be beaten 
from the Admiral's stern, determined to prevent his design. 
Hereupon two of our canoes, to wit Captain Springer's and 
my own, stood off to meet him. He made up directly towards 
the Admiral, who stood upon the quarter-deck waving to 
him with a handkerchief so to do. But we engaged him so 
closely in the middle of his way, that had he not given us the 
helm and made away from us, we had certainly been on board 
him. We killed so many of them that the vessel had scarce 
men enough left alive or unwounded to carry her off. Yet, 
the wind now blowing fresh, they made shift to get away 
from us, and hereby saved their lives. 

The vessel which was to relieve the Admiral being thus 
put to flight, we came about again upon the Admiral, and all 
together gave a loud halloo, which was answered by our 
men in the periagua, though at a distance from us. At that 
time we came so close under the stern of the Admiral that we 
wedged up the rudder ; and withal killed both the Admiral 
himself and the chief pilot of his ship, so that now they were 
almost quite disabled and disheartened likewise, seeing what 
a bloody massacre we had made among them with our shot. 
Hereupon, two-thirds of their men being killed and many 
others wounded, they cried for quarter, which had several 
times been offered unto them and as stoutly denied until 
then. Captain Coxon entered on board the Admiral, and took 
with him Captain Harris, who had been shot through both 
his legs, as he boldly adventured up along the side of the ship. 
This vessel being thus taken, we put on board her also all the 
rest of our wounded men, and instantly manned two of our 
canoes to go and aid Captain Sawkins, who now had been 
three times beaten from on board by Peralta, such valiant 



324 THE SPANIARDS DEFEATED 

defence had he made. And indeed, to give our enemies 
their due, no men in the world did ever act more bravely 
than these Spaniards. 

Thus coming up close under Peralta's side, we gave him a 
full volley of shot, and expected to have the like return from 
him again, but on a sudden we saw his men blown up that 
were abaft the mast — some of them falling on the deck, 
and others into the sea. This disaster was no sooner perceived 
by their vahant Captain Peralta than he leaped overboard, 
and, in spite of all our shot, got several of them into the ship 
again, though he was much burnt in both his hands himself. 
But, as one misfortune seldom comes alone, whilst he was 
recovering these men to reinforce his ship withal and renew 
the fight, another jar of powder took fire forward, and blew up 
several others upon the forecastle. Among this smoke, and 
under cover thereof. Captain Sawkins laid them on board 
and took the ship. Soon after they were taken, I went on 
board Captain Peralta, to see what condition they were in, 
and indeed such a miserable sight I never saw in my life, 
for not one man there was found but was either killed, desper- 
ately wounded, or horribly burnt with powder, insomuch 
that their black skins were turned white in several places, 
the powder having torn it from their flesh and bones. Having 
compassionated their misery, I went afterwards on board the 
Admiral, to observe hkewise the condition of his ship and 
men. Here I saw what did much astonish me, and will scarcely 
be believed by others than ourselves who saw it. There were 
found on board this ship but 25 men alive, whose number 
before the fight had been four-score-and-six, as was said 
above. So that three-score-and-one, out of so small a number, 
were destroyed in the battle. But, what is more, of these 
25 men only eight were able to bear arms, all the rest being 
desperately wounded, and by their wounds totally disabled 
to make any resistance or defend themselves. Their blood 
ran down the decks in whole streams, and scarce one place in 
the ship was found that was free from blood. 

Having possessed ourselves of these two Armadilla vessels, 
or little men-of-war, Captain Sawkins asked the prisoners 
how many men there might be on board the greatest ship 
that we could see, lying in the harbour of the ii,land of Pence 
above-mentioned, as also in the others that were something 



THE ARMADILLA, OR LITTLE FLEET 325 

smaller. Captain Peralta, hearing these questions, dissuaded 
him as much as he could from attempting them, saying that 
in the biggest alone there were 350 men, and that he would 
find the rest too well provided for defence against his small 
number. But one of his men, who lay a-dying upon the deck, 
contradicted him as he was speaking, and told Captain 
Sawkins there was not one man on board any of those ships 
that were in view ; for they had all been taken out of them 
to fight us in these three vessels called the Armadilla, or Little 
Fleet. Unto this relation we gave credit, as proceeding from 
a dying man ; and, steering our course to the island, we 
went on board them, and found, as he had said, not one person 
there. The biggest ship of these, which was called La Santis- 
sima Trinidad, or The Blessed Trinity, they had set on fire, 
made a hole in her, and loosened her foresail ; but we quenched 
the fire with all speed, and stopped the leak. This being done, 
we put our wounded men on board her, and thus constituted 
her for the time being our hospital. 

Having surveyed our own loss and damages, we found 
that 18 of our men had been killed in the fight, and 22 were 
wounded. These three Captains against whom we fought 
were esteemed by the Spaniards to be the valiantest in all 
the South Seas. Neither was this reputation undeservedly 
conferred upon them, as may easily be inferred from the 
relation we have given of this bloody engagement. As the 
third ship was running away from the fight, she met with 
two more that were coming out to their assistance, but gave 
them so little encouragement that they returned back and 
dared not engage us. We began the fight about half-an-hour 
after sunrise, and by noon had finished the battle and quite 
overcome them. Captain Peralta, while he was our prisoner, 
would often break out in admiration of our valour, and say : 
Surely we Englishmen were the valiantest men in the whole 
world, who designed always to fight open, whilst all other nations 
invented all the ways imaginable to barricade themselves, and 
fight as close as they could. And yet, notwithstanding, we 
killed more of our enemies than they of us. 

Two days after our engagement, we buried Captain Peter 
Harris, a brave and stout soldier and a valiant Englishman, 
born in the county of Kent ; whose death we very much 
lamented. He died of. the wounds he received in the battle. 



326 BURIAL OF CAPTAIN HARRIS 

and besides him only one man more : all the rest of our 
wounded men recovered. Being now come before Panama, 
I here inquired of Don Francisco de Peralta, our prisoner, 
many things concerning the state and condition of this city 
and the neighbouring country, and he satisfied me in manner 
following. 



CHAPTER VIII 

Descriptiofi of the state and condition of Panama, and the parts 
adjacent. What vessels they took while they blocked up the 
said Port. Captain Coxon with 70 more return home. 
Sawkins is chosen in chief 

The famous city of Panama is situated in the latitude of 
9 degrees North. It stands in a deep bay, belonging to the 
South Sea. It is in form round, excepting only that part 
where it runs along the sea-side. Formerly it stood four 
miles more to the East, when it was taken by Sir Henry 
Morgan, as is related in the History of the Buccaneers. But 
then, being burnt, and three times more since that time by 
casualty, they removed it to the place where it now stands. 
Yet, notwithstanding, there are some poor people still in- 
habiting the old town, and the cathedral church is still kept 
there, the beautiful building whereof makes a fair show at 
a distance, like that of St Paul's in London. This new city of 
which I now speak is much bigger than the old one, and is 
built for the most part of brick, the rest being of stone, and 
tiled. As for the churches belonging thereto, they are not as 
yet finished. These are eight in number, whereof the chief 
is called Santa Maria. The extent of the city comprehends 
better than a mile-and-a-half in length, and above a mile 
in breadth. The houses for the most part are three stories 
in height. It is well walled round about, with two gates 
belonging thereto, excepting only where a creek comes into 
the city, the which at high-water lets in barks, to furnish the 
inhabitants with all sorts of provisions and other necessaries. 
Here are always 300 of the King's soldiers to garrison the 
city ; besides which number, their mihtia, of all colours, are 
1 100. But, at the time that we arrived there, most of their 
soldiers were out of town, insomuch that our coming put the 

327 



32 8 THE CITY OF PANAMA 

rest into great consternation, they having had but one night's 
notice of our being in those seas. Hence we were induced 
to beUeve that, had we gone ashore instead of fighting their 
ships, we had certainly rendered ourselves masters of the 
place ; especially considering that all their chief men were on 
board the Admiral — I mean such as were undoubtedly the 
best soldiers. Round about the city, for the space of seven 
leagues, more or less, all the adjacent country is Savanna, as 
they call it in the Spanish language, that is to say, plain and 
level ground, as smooth as a sheet, for this is the signification 
of the word Savanna. Only here and there is to be seen 
a small spot of woody land, and everywhere this level ground 
is full of vacadas or heef stantions^, where whole droves of 
cows and oxen are kept, which serve as well as so many 
look-outs, or watch-towers, to descry if an enemy is approach- 
ing by land. The ground whereon the city stands is very 
damp and moist, which renders the place of bad repute for 
the concern of health. The water is also very full of worms, 
and these are much prejudicial to shipping ; which is the 
cause that the King's ships lie always at Lima, the capital 
city of Peru, unless when they come down to Panama to bring 
the King's plate, which is only at such times as the fleet of 
galleons comes from Old Spain to fetch and convey it thither. 
Here, in one night after our arrival, we found worms of 
three-quarters of an inch in length, both in our bedclothes 
and other apparel. 

At the island of Perico above-mentioned we seized in all 
five ships ; of these, the first and biggest was named, as was 
said before, the Trinidad, and was a great ship, of the burden 
of 400 tons. Her lading consisted of wine, sugar, sweetmeats 
(whereof the Spaniards in those hot countries make infinite 
use), skins, and soap. The second ship was of about 300 tons 
burden, and not above half laden with bars of iron, which is 
one of the richest commodities that are brought into the 
South Sea. This vessel we burnt with the lading in her, 
because the Spaniards pretended not to want that com- 
modity, and therefore would not redeem it. The third was 
laden with sugar, being of the burden of one-hundred and 
four-score tons, more or less. This vessel was given to be 
under the command of Captain Cook. The fourth was an 
^ Spanish estancia, a dwelling, ' station ' for cattle. 



WITHDRAWAL OF CAPT. COXON 329 

old ship of sixty tons burden, which was laden with flour of 
meal. This ship we likewise burnt with her lading, esteeming 
both bottom and cargo at that time to be useless to us. The 
fifth was a ship of 50 tons, which, with a periagua, Captain 
Coxon took along with him when he left us. 

Within two or three days after our arrival at Panama, 
Captain Coxon being much dissatisfied with some reflections 
which had been made upon him by our company, determined 
to leave us and return back to our ships in the Northern 
Seas by the same way he came thither. Unto this effect he 
persuaded several of our company, who sided most with 
him and had had the chief hand in his election, to fall off 
from us, and bear him company in his journey or march 
overland. The main cause of those reflections was his back- 
wardness in the last engagement with the A rmadilla, concern- 
ing which point some sticked not to defame, or brand, him 
with the note of cowardice. He drew off with him threescore- 
and-ten of our men, who all returned back with him in the 
ship and periagua above-mentioned towards the mouth of the 
river of Santa Maria. In his company also went back the 
Indian King, Captain Antonio, and Don Andraeas, who, being 
old, desired to be excused from staying any' longer with us. 
However, the King desired we would not be less vigorous in 
annoying their enemy and ours, the Spaniards, than if he 
were personally present with us. And, to the intent we might 
see how faithfully he intended to deal with us, he at the same 
time recommended both his son and nephew to the care of 
Captain Sawkins, who was now our newly-chosen General or 
Commander-in-Chief in the absence of Captain Sharp. The 
two Armadilla ships which we took in the engagement we 
burnt also, saving no other thing of them both but their 
rigging and sails. With them also we burnt a small bark 
which came into the port laden with fowls and poultry. 

On Sunday, which was April 25th, Captain Sharp with his 
bark and company came in and joined us again. His absence 
was occasioned by want of water, which forced him to bear 
up to the King's Islands. Being there, he found a new bark, 
which he at once took, and burnt his old one. This vessel 
did sail excellently well. Within a day or two after the 
arrival of Captain Sharp came in likewise the people of 
Captain Harris who were still absent. These had also taken 



330 THE ISLAND OF TAVOGA 

another bark, and cut down the masts of their old one by the 
board, and thus without masts or sails turned away the 
prisoners they had taken in her. The next day we took in 
like manner another bark which arrived from Nata, being 
laden with fowls, as before. In this bark we turned away 
all the meanest of the prisoners we had on board us. 

Having continued before Panama for the space of ten 
days, being employed in the affairs aforementioned, on 
May 2nd we weighed from the island of Perico, and stood off 
to another island, distant two leagues farther from thence, 
called Tavoga. On this island stands a town which bears the 
same name, and consists of a hundred houses, more or less. 
The people of the town had all fled on seeing our vessels 
arrive. While we were here, some of our men being drunk 
on shore happened to set fire to one of the houses ; which 
consum.ed twelve houses more before any could get ashore 
to quench it. To this island came several Spanish merchants 
from Panama, and sold us what commodities we needed, 
buying also of us much of the goods we had taken in their 
own vessels. They gave us likewise 200 pieces-of-eight for 
each negro we could spare them of such as were our prisoners. 
From this island we could easily see all the vessels that went 
out or came into the Port of Panama ; and here we took 
likewise several barks that were laden with fowls. 

Eight days after our arrival at Tavoga we took a ship 
that was coming from Truxillo and bound for Panama. In 
this vessel we found 2000 jars of wine, 50 jars of gunpowder, 
and 51,000 pieces-of-eight. This money had been sent from 
that city to pay the soldiers belonging to the garrison of 
Panama. From the said prize we had information given 
us that there was another ship coming from Lima with 
100,000 pieces-of-eight more ; which ship was to sail ten or 
twelve days after them, and which they said could not be 
long before she arrived at Panama. Within two days after 
this intelligence we took also another ship laden with flour 
from Truxillo, belonging to certain Indians, inhabitants 
of the same place or thereabouts. This prize confirmed what 
the first had told us of that rich ship, and said, as the others 
had done before, that she would be there in the space of eight 
or ten days. 

Whilst we lay at Tavoga, the President, that is to say the 



CAPT. SAWKINS' MESSAGE 331 

Governor, of Panama, sent a message by some merchants 
to us to know what we came for into those parts. To this 
message Captain Sawkins made answer : That we came to 
assist the King of Darien, who was the true Lord of Panama 
and all the country thereabouts. And thai since we were come 
so far, there was no reason hut that we should have some satis- 
faction. So that if he pleased to send us 500 pieces-of-eight for 
each man, and 1000 for each Commander, and not any farther 
to annoy the Indians hut suffer them to use their own power 
and liberty as became the true and natural lords of the country, 
that then we would desist from all further hostilities and go away 
peaceably : otherwise, that we should stay there, and get what 
we could, causing to them what damage was possible. By the 
merchants also that went and came to Panama we under- 
stood there lived then as Bishop of Panama one who had 
been formerly Bishop of Santa Martha, and who was prisoner 
to Captain Sawkins when he took the said place about four 
or five years past. The Captain having received this intelli- 
gence, sent two loaves of sugar to the Bishop as a present. 
On the next day the merchant who carried them, returning 
to Tavoga, brought to the Captain a gold ring for a retaliation 
of said present. And withal he brought a message to Captain 
Sawkins from the President above-mentioned, to know 
farther of him, since we were EngHshmen, from whom we 
had our commission, and to whom he ought to complain for the 
damages we had already done them. To this message Captain 
Sawkins sent back for answer : That as yet all his company 
were not come together ; hut that when they were come up we 
would come and visit him at Panama, and bring our commissions 
on the muzzles of our guns, at which time he should read them as 
plain as the flame of gunpowder could make them. 

At this island of Tavoga Captain Sawkins would fain have 
stayed longer, to wait for the rich ship above-mentioned that 
was coming from Peru ; but our men were so importunate 
for fresh victuals that no reason could rule them, nor their 
own interest persuade them to anything that might conduce 
to this purpose. Hereupon, on May 15th, we weighed anchor, 
and sailed thence to the island of Otoque. Being arrived 
there, we lay by it while our boat went ashore and fetched off 
fowls and hogs and other things necessary for sustenance. 
Here at Otoque I finished a draft from point Garachine to 



332 



THE BAY OF PANAMA 



the bay of Panama, etc. Of this I may dare to affirm that it 
is in general more correct and true than any the Spaniards 
have themselves, for which cause I have here inserted it, 
for the satisfaction of those that are curious in such things. 

From Otoque we sailed to the island of Cayboa, which is 
a place very famous for the pearl-fishery thereabouts, and is 
at the distance of eight leagues from another place called 
Puebla Nueva, on the mainland. In our way to this island 
we lost two of our barks, the one whereof had fifteen men 
in her, and the other seven. Being arrived, we cast anchor 
at the said island. 



(zr£^a^^^, 



B*Olarirt 




TanMHta M> 



/^^"»« ^'Lfs^ ciua^f 




CHAPTER IX 

Captain Sawkins, Chief Commander of the Buccaneers, is 
killed before Puchla Nueua. They are repulsed from the 
said place. Captain Sharp chosen to be their leader. 
Many more of their company leave them and return home 
overland 

While we lay at anchor before Cayboa our two Chief Com- 
manders, Captain Sawkins and Captain Sharp, taking with 
them threescore men, more or less, went in the ship of Captain 
Cook to the mouth of the river where Puebla Nueva is situated. 
The day of this action, as I find it quoted in my Journal, was 
May 22nd, 1679. When they came to the river's mouth, they 
put themselves into canoes, and were piloted up the river 
towards the town by a negro who was one of our prisoners. 
I was chosen to be concerned in this action, but happened 
not to land, being commanded to remain in Captain Cook's 
ship while they went up to assault the town. But here at 
Puebla Nueva the inhabitants were too well prepared for 
the reception of our party. For a distance of a mile below the 
town they had cut down great trees and laid them across 
the river, with design to hinder the ascent of any boats. 
In like manner on shore before the town itself they had 
raised three strong breastworks, and made other things for 
their defence. Here, therefore, Captain Sawkins, running 
up to the breastworks at the head of a few men, was killed : 
a man who was as valiant and courageous as any could be, 
and likewise, next to Captain Sharp, the best beloved of all 
our company or the most part thereof. Neither was this 
love undeserved by him, for we ought justly to attribute 
to him the greatest honour we gained in our engagement 
before Panama with the Spanish Armadilla, or lAttle Fleet, 
especially, considering that, as has been said above, Captain 

333 



334 MORE BUCCANEERS WITHDRAW 

Sharp was by accident absent at the time of that great and 
bloody fight. 

We that remained behind on board the ship of Captain 
Cook carried her within the mouth of the river of Puebla 
Nueva, and entered close by the East shore, which here is 
crowned with a round hill. Here within two stone's cast of 
shore we had four fathom water. Within the point opens a 
very large and fine river, which falls from a sandy bay at a 
small distance thence. But, as we were getting in, being 
strangers to the place we unwittingly ran our ship aground, 
nigh to a rock which lies on the Westward shore : for the 
true channel of the said river is nearer to the East than the 
West shore. With Captain Sawkins, in the unfortunate 
assault of this place, there died two men more, and three 
were wounded in the retreat, which they performed to the 
canoes in pretty good order. On their way down the river 
Captain Sharp took a ship, whose lading consisted of indigo, 
otto, manteca, or butter, and pitch, and likewise burnt two 
vessels more, as being of no value. With this he returned on 
board our ships, much troubled in his mind, and grieved for 
the loss of so bold and brave a partner in his adventures as 
Sawkins had constantly shown himself to be. His death was 
much lamented, and occasioned another party of our men 
to mutiny and leave us, returning overland as Captain Coxon 
and his company had done before. 

Three days after the death of Captain Sawkins, Captain 
Sharp, who was now Commander-in-Chief, gave the ship 
which he had taken in the river of Puebla Nueva, which was 
of the burden of one hundred tons, more or less, to Captain 
Cook, to command and sail in — ordering withal that the old 
vessel which he had should go with those men that designed 
to leave us, their mutiny and our distraction being now grown 
very high. Hereupon Captain Sharp coming on board La 
Trinidad, the greatest of our ships, asked our men in full 
council who of them were wilUng to go or stay, and prosecute 
the design Captain Sawkins had undertaken, which was to 
remain in the South Sea and there to make a complete voyage ; 
after which, he intended to go home round about America, 
through the Strait of Magellan. He added withal that he 
did not as yet fear, or doubt in the least, but to make each 
man who should stay with him worth one thousand pounds 



MORE BUCCANEERS WITHDRAW 335 

by the fruits he hoped to reap of that voyage. All those 
who had remained after the departure of Captain Coxon, 
for love of Captain Sawkins and only to be in his company 
and under his conduct, thinking thereby to make their 
fortunes, would stay no longer, but pressed to depart. Among 
this number I acknowledge myself to have been one, being 
totally desirous in my mind to quit those hazardous adven- 
tures, and return homewards with those who were now 
going to leave us. Yet, being much afraid and averse to trust 
myself among wild Indians any farther, I chose rather to 
stay, though unwilHng, and venture on that long and danger- 
ous voyage. Besides which danger of the Indians, I con- 
sidered that the rains were now already up, and it would 
be hard passing so many guUies, which of necessity would 
then be full of water and consequently create more than one 
single peril to the undertakers of that journey. Yet, not- 
withstanding, 63 men of our company were resolved to 
encounter all these hardships, and to depart from us. Here- 
unto they took their leave of us, and returned homewards, 
taking with them the Indian King's son and the rest of the 
Indians for their guides overland. They had, as was said 
above, the ship wherein Captain Cook sailed to carry them, 
and out of our provisions as much as would serve for treble 
their number. 

Thus on the last day of May they departed, leaving us 
employed about taking in water and cutting down wood at 
the island of Cayboa aforementioned, where this mutiny 
happened. Here we caught very good tortoises and red-deer. 
We killed also alligators of a very large size, some of them 
being above twenty-feet in length. But we could not find 
but that they were very fearful of a man, and would fly from 
us very hastily when we hunted them. This island hes 
S.S.E. from the mouth of the river above-mentioned. On the 
South-east side of the island is a shoal, or spit, of sand, which 
stretches itself the space of a quarter-of-a-league into the sea. 
Here, therefore, just within this shoal, we anchored in fourteen 
fathom water. The island on this side thereof makes two 
great bays, in the first of which we watered at a certain pond 
not distant above the cast of a stone from the bay. In this 
pond, as I was washing myself and standing under a man- 
Manilla tree, a small shower of rain happened to fall on the 



33^ TORTOISES; RED-DEER; OYSTERS 

tree, and thence dropped on my skin. These drops caused 
me to break out all over my body into red spots, of which 
I was not well for the space of a week after. Here I ate very 
large oysters, the biggest that ever I ate in my life, insomuch 
that I was forced to cut them into four pieces, each quarter 
of them being a good mouthful i. 

Three days after the departure of the mutineers Captain 
Sharp ordered us to burn the ship that they hitherto had 
sailed in, only out of design to make use of the ironwork 
belonging to the said vessel. Withal, we put all the flour 
that was her lading into the last prize, taken in the river of 
Puebla Nueva, and Captain Cook, as was said before, was 
ordered to command her. But the men belonging to his 
company would not sail any longer under his command. 
Hereupon he quitted his vessel and came on board our Admiral, 
the great ship above-mentioned, called La Trinidad, deter- 
mining to rule over such unruly company no longer. In his 
place was put one whose name was John Cox, an inhabitant 
of New England, who forced kindred, as was thought, upon 
Captain Sharp, out of old acquaintance, in this conjuncture 
of time, only to advance himself. Thus he was made, as it 
were, Vice-Admiral to Captain Sharp. The next day three 
of our prisoners, viz. an Indian, who was Captain of a 
ship, and two mulattos ran away from us, and made their 
escape. 

After this it was thought convenient to send Captain 
Peralta prisoner in the Admiral, on board the ship of Mr 
Cox. This was done to the intent he might not hinder the 
endeavours of Captain Juan, who was Commander of the 
money-ship we took, as was mentioned, at the island of 
Tavoga. For this man had now promised to do great things 
for us, by piloting and conducting us to several places of great 
riches, but more especially to Guayaquil, where he said we 
might lay down our silver and lade our vessels with gold. 
This design was undertaken by Captain Sawkins, and had 
not the head-strongness of his men brought him to the island 
of Cay boa, where he lost his life, he had certainly effected it 
before now. That night we had such thunder and lightning 
as I never had heard before in all my hfe. Our prisoners 

^ It does not seem to occur to the writer that his ' red spots ' were 
more probably due to the oysters than to the rain ! 



THUNDER AND LIGHTNING 337 

told us that in these parts it very often causes great damages 
both by sea and land. And my opinion led me to believe 
that our mainmast received some damage on this occasion. 
The rainy season being now entered, the wind for the most 
part was at N.W., though not without some calms. 



CHAPTER X 

They depart from the island of Cayhoa to the isle of Gorgona, 
where they careen their vessels. Description of this isle. 
They resolve to go and plunder Arica, leaving their design of 
Guayaquil 

Having got in all things necessary for navigation, we were 
now in readiness to depart on Sunday, June 6th, 1680. That 
day some rain fell, which now was very frequent in all places. 
About five o'clock in the evening we set sail from the island 
of Cayboa, with a small breeze, the wind being at S.S.W. 
Our course was E.S. by E. and S.E. having all night a very 
small, or little, wind. The same calmness of weather con- 
tinued all the next day, insomuch, that we lay and drove 
only as the current horsed us to N.W. 

Little better than a calm we had also the third day of our 
navigation. Meanwhile a current drove us to the Westward. 
About sunrising we descried Quicara, which at that time bore 
N.W. by W. from us at the distance of five leagues, more or 
less. With the rising of the sun an easy gale of wind sprang 
up, so that at noon we had altered our bearing, which was 
then N. by E. being six leagues distant, and appearing thus, 
as is underneath demonstrated. 



i 




Quicara 



These are two several islands, whereof the least is to the 
Southward of the other. The land is a low table-land, these 
islands being more than three leagues in length. About six 
o'clock that evening we were nigh ten leagues distant W.S.W. 
from them. Much like the former weather we had the fourth 

338 



TORTOISES; DOLPHINS; FISH 339 

day of our sailing, with little wind in the forenoon and rather 
less than more in the afternoon. I judged, about the middle 
of the day, we were at the distance of twenty leagues S.S.W. 
from the said islands. 

Thursday, June loth, we had very small and variable 
winds. This day I reckoned that we had made hitherto a 
S. by E. way, and a S. by W. from our departure, being driven 
by a current, according to the observation I made, into 
lat. 6° 30'. 

This day we saw many tortoises floating upon the sea. 
Hereupon we hoisted out our boat, and came to one of them, 
who offered not to stir until she was struck, and even then 
not to sink to the bottom but rather to swim away. The sea 
hereabouts is very full of several sorts of fish, as dolphins, 
bonitos, albicores\ mullets, and old wives^ etc., which came 
swimming about our ship in whole shoals. The next day, 
which was Friday, we had Ukewise very little wind, which 
was no more than we had all Thursday night, with some 
showers of rain. That day we had an observation which was 
lat. 6° N. In the evening a fresh wind came up at S.W., 
our course being S.S.E. On Saturday we had in like manner, 
about seven in the morning, a fresh breeze at S. So we stood 
W.S.W. with cloudy weather, and several showers of rain. 
This day our Spanish prisoners informed us we must not 
expect any settled wind until we came within the latitude of 
three degrees, for all along the Western shore of these seas 
there is little wind, which is the cause that those ships that 
go from Acapulco to the islands called De las Philipinas, do 
coast along the shore of Cahfornia, until they get into the 
height of 45 degrees, yea, sometimes of 50 degrees latitude. 
As the wind varied, so we tacked several times, thereby to 
make the best of our way that was possible to the Southward. 

As our prisoners had informed us, so we found it by experi- 
ence. For on the next day, which was Sunday, June 13th, 
we had very little wind, and most commonly none, for the 
space of twenty-four hours. That day we tried the current 

^ Span, albacore, a large species of tunny found in West Indian seas : 
cf. Hakluyt, Voyages [1579], vol. II, ii, 100 : "... the fish which is 
called albocore, as big as a salmon." 

* The wrasse, or soa-cream. Monfet, Health's Improv. [1655] : "Of 
fresh- water fish. . . . Old wives (because of their mumping and soure 
countenance." P. Browne, Jamaica [1756]: "A saying That an Old 
Wife is the best of fish, and worst of flesh." 



340 FISHING 

of the sea, and found it very strong to the eastward. The 
same day we had much rain, and in the afternoon a small 
breeze at W., and W.S.W., but mostly at W. Yet, notwith- 
standing all this calmness of weather, the next day in the 
morning very early, by a sudden gale of wind which arose we 
made shift to split our main top-sail. We had all the night 
before and that day continued and incessant showers of rain, 
and made a S.W. and by S. way ; seeing all along as we went 
a multitude of dolphins, bonitos, and several other sorts of 
fish floating upon the seas, whereof in the afternoon we caught 
many, the weather being now changed from stormy to calm 
again — insomuch that we could fish as we sailed along, or 
rather as we lay tumbling in the calm. 

Tuesday, June 15th, the morning continued calm as the day 
before ; and this day also we saw multitudes of fish of several 
sorts, whereof we caught some for our table, as we were wont 
to do. By an observation which was made this day, we 
found ourselves to be now in lat. 4° 21'. At this time the 
course of our navigation and our whole design was to go 
and careen our vessels at the islands commonly called by the 
Spaniards De los Galapagos, that is to say ' of the Tortoises ', 
being so denominated from the infinite number of those 
animals swarming and breeding thereabouts. These islands 
are situated under the equinoctial Hne at the distance of 
100 leagues, more or less, from the main continent of America, 
in the South Sea. In the afternoon of this day we had a small 
breeze to push us forwards. 

June i6th, being Wednesday, we made our way this day, 
and for the four-and-twenty hours last past, E.S.E., with 
much rain, which ceased not to fall, as in all this voyage, 
since our departure from Cay boa. This day likewise we 
caught several dolphins and other sorts of fish, but in the even- 
ing we had again a fresh breeze at S. by W., our course being, 
as was just now said, E.S.E. 

The next day, which was June 17th, about five in the 
morning we descried land, which appeared all along to be 
very low, and hkewise full of creeks and bays. We instantly 
asked our pilot what land that was before us ; but he rephed 
he knew it not. Hereupon, being doubtful of our condition, 
we called Mr Cox on board us, who brought Captain Peralta 
with him. This gentleman, being asked, presently told us 



THE ISLAND OF GORGONA 341 

the land we saw was the land of Barbacoa, being almost a 
wild country all over. Withal he informed us that to leeward 
of us, at the distance of ten leagues or thereabouts, did lie 
an island called by the name of Gorgona, which island, he 
said, the Spaniards did shun, and very seldom come nigh to, 
by reason of the incessant and continual rains there falling, 
scarce one day in the year being dry at that place. Captain 
Sharp, having heard this information of Captain Peralta, 
judged the said island might be the fittest place for our com- 
pany to careen at, considering that, if the Spaniards did not 
frequent it, we might in all probability lie there undescried, 
and our enemies the Spaniards in the meantime might think 
that we were gone out of those seas. At this time it was that 
I seriously repented my staying in the South Seas and that 
I did not return homewards in company of them that went 
before us. For I knew, and could easily perceive, that by 
these delays the Spaniards would gain time and be able to 
send advice of our coming to every port all along the coast, 
so that we should be prevented in all or most of our attempts 
and designs wheresoever we came. But those of our com- 
pany who had got money by the former prizes of this voyage 
over-swayed the others who had lost all their booty at 
gambling. Thus we bore away for the island aforesaid of 
Gorgona, and at the distance of six leagues and a half, at 
S.W.I, observed it to make the appearance following. 




Gorgona LAT, 



On the mainland over against this island of Gorgona we 
were told by our prisoners that up a great laguna, or lake, is 
seated an Indian town, where they have great quantity of 
sand-grains of gold. Moreover, that, five days' journey up 
a river belonging to the said laguna, do dwell four Spanish 
superintendents, who have each of them the charge of over- 
seeing 50 or 60 Indians who are employed in gathering that 



342 



THE ISLAND OF GORGONA 



gold which slips from the chief collectors, or finders, thereof. 
These are at least threescore and ten or fourscore Spaniards, 
with a great number of slaves belonging to them, who dwell 
higher up than these four superintendents, at a distance of 
twenty- five or thirty days' journey on the said river. That 
once every year, at a certain season, there comes a vessel from 
Lima, the capital city of Peru, to fetch the gold that here is 
gathered, and to bring to these people such necessaries as 
they want. By land it is nothing less than six-weeks' travel 
from thence to Lima. 

The mainland to windward of this island is very low and 
full of rivers. All along the coast it rains most desperately. 
The island is only 4 leagues distant from the continent. 
While we lay at it, I took the whole circumference thereof, 
which is according to what is here underneath described. 










Captain Sharp gave to this island the name of Sharp's 
Isle, by reason we careened at this place. We anchored on 
the South side of the island, at the mouth of a very fine river, 
which there disgorges itself into the sea. There belong to 
this island about thirty rivers and rivulets, which all fall 
from the rocks on the severa,l sides of the island. The whole 



SNAKES; WHALES; GRAMPUSES 343 

circumference thereof is about three-leagues-and-a-half, 
being all high and mountainous land, excepting only on that 
side where we cast anchor. Here therefore we moored our 
ship in the depth of eighteen or twenty fathom water, and 
began to unrig the vessel. But we were four or five days' 
space before we could get our sails dry so as to be able to take 
them from the >ards, there falling a shower of rain almost 
every hour of the day and night. The mainland to the East 
of the island, and so stretching northward, is extremely high 
and towering, and perpetually clouded, excepting only at 
the rising of the sun, at which lime the tops of those hills are 
clear. From the South side of this island where we anchored, 
as was said above, we could see the lowland of the main, at 
least a point thereof which lies nearest to the island. The 
appearance it makes is as it were of trees growing out of the 
water. 

Friday, July 2nd, as we were heaving down our ship, our 
mainm.ast happened to crack. Hereupon our carpenters were 
constrained to cut out large fishes, and fish it, as the usual 
terms of that art do name the thing. 

On the next day after the mischance of our mainmast, we 
killed a snake which had fourteen inches in circumference 
and eleven feet in length. About the distance of a league from 
this island runs a ledge of rocks, over which the water con- 
tinually breaks — the ledge being about two miles, more or 
less, in length. Had we anchored but half-a-mile more 
northerly, we had ridden in much smoother water ; for here 
where we were the wind came in upon us in violent gusts. 
While we were there, from June 30th to July 3rd, we had 
dry weather, which was esteemed as a rarity by the 
Spaniards, our prisoners. And every day we saw whales and 
grampuses, who would often come and dive under our ship. 
We fired at them several times, but our bullets rebounded 
from their bodies. Our choice and best provisions here were 
Indian conies, monkeys, snakes, oysters, conchs, periwinkles, 
and a few small turtle, with some other sorts of good fish. 
Here in like manner we caught a sloth, a beast well deserving 
that name, given it by the Spaniards, by whom it is called 
pereza, from the Latin word pigritia. 

At this island died Josephe Gabriel, a Spaniard, born in 
Chile, who was to have been our pilot to Panama. He was 



344 DECISION TO GO TO ARICA 

the same man who had stolen and married the Indian King's 
daughter, as was mentioned above. He had all along been 
very true and faithful to us in discovering several plots and 
conspiracies among our prisoners, either to get away or destroy 
us. His death was occasioned by a calenture, or malignant 
fever, which killed him after three days' sickness, having lain 
two days senseless. During the time of our stay at this 
island we lengthened our topsails, and got up topgallant 
masts ; we made two staysails, and refitted our ship very 
well. But we wanted provisions extremely, as having nothing 
considerable of any sort but flour and water. Being almost 
ready to depart. Captain Sharp, our Commander, gave us to 
understand he had changed his resolution concerning the 
design of going to Guayaquil, for he thought it would be in 
vain to go thither considering that in all this time we must 
of necessity have been descried before now. Yet notwith- 
standing he himself before had persuaded us to stay. Being 
very doubtful among ourselves what course we should take, 
a certain old man who had long time sailed among the 
Spaniards told us he could carry us to a place called Arica, 
to which town, he said, all the plate was brought down from 
Potosi, Chiquisaca, and several other places within the land, 
where it was dug out of the mountains and mines, and that he 
doubted not but that we might get there of purchase at least 
2000 pounds every man. For all the plate of the South Sea 
lay there, as it were, in store, being deposited at the said place 
until such time as the ships did fetch it away. Being moved 
with these reasons, and having deliberated thereupon, we 
resolved in the end to go to the said place. At this island of 
Gorgona afore-mentioned we likewise took down our round- 
house coach, and all the high carved work belonging to the 
stern of the ship, for, when we took her from the Spaniards 
before Panama, she was high as any third-rate ship in England. 



CHAPTER XI 

The Buccaneers depart from the isle of Gorgona, with design to 
plunder Arica. They lose one another by the way. They 
touch at the Isle of Plate, or Drake's Isle, where they meet 
again. Description of this isle. Some memoirs of Sir 
Francis Drake. An account of this voyage and the coasts all 
along. They sail as far in a fortnight as the Spaniards 
usually do in three months 

On Sunday, July 25th, in the afternoon, all things being now 
in readiness for our departure, we set sail, and stood away 
from the island of Gorgona, or Sharp's Isle, with a small 
breeze which served us at N.W. But as the sun went down 
that day, so our breeze died away by degrees. Yet already 
we could begin to experiment that our ship sailed much 
better since the taking down of her round house and the 
other alterations which we made in her. 

The next day about two o'clock in the morning we had 
a land-breeze to help us, which lasted for the space of six 
hours, more or less. So that at noon we found ourselves to 
be five-leagues-and-a-half distant to the South-West from 
Gorgona. This day the Spaniards, our prisoners, told us, in 
common discourse, that in most part of this lowland coast 
they find three-score fathom water. In the afternoon we had 
a very strong land-breeze : meanwhile we continued making 
short trips off and in. That night we had much rain for the 
greatest part of the night, which occasioned the next morning, 
being the third day of our navigation, to be very cloudy 
until ten o'clock. About that hour it cleared up, and then 
we saw the island of Gorgona at E.N.E., being distant about 
12 leagues more or less from us. We had the wind all this 
day at S.W., where it continued, seldom varying above two 
points of the compass to the westwards. Night being come, 

345 



346 DEPARTURE FROM GORGONA 

about two o'clock Captain Sharp ordered me to speak to Cap- 
tain Cox and bid him go about and stand off from the shore, 
for he feared less Cox should come too nigh unto it. But he 
replied he knew well that he might stand in until two o'clock. 
The next day very early in the morning we saw him not, the 
morning being cloudy and stark calm. Yet notwithstanding 
at eight o'clock it cleared up, and neither then could we see 
him. Hence we concluded, and so it proved, that we had 
lost him in the obscurity of the night, through his obstinacy 
in standing in too long and not coming about when we spoke 
to him. Thus our Admiral's ship was left alone, and we had 
not the company of Captain Cox any longer in this voyage, 
till we arrived at the Isle of Plate, where we had the good 
fortune to find him again, as shall be mentioned hereafter. 
The weather being clear this morning, we could see Gorgona, 
at a distance of at least 15 or 16 leagues to the E.N.E. All 
this day it continued calm till about four in the afternoon, 
at which time we had a W.S.W. wind, which continued to 
blow all that night. 

Thursday, July 29th, 1679, This day the wind continued 
pretty fresh all day long. About four in the afternoon we 
came within sight of the island Del Gallo, which I guessed 
to be nigh 28 leagues distant from that of Gorgona, the place 
of our departure S.W. It is about nine leagues distant E. 
from the main ; so that the island with the mainland S.W. 
from it appears thus : — 




Gallo LAT. 2. 12. N. 

All this day the weather continued clear, and the wind 
W.S.W. 

The next day, July 30th, the wind blew very fresh and brisk, 
insomuch that we were in some fear for the heads of our low 
masts, being very sensible that they were but weak. About 
three or four in the afternoon we saw another island, 6 or 7 
leagues distant from Gallo, called Gorgonilla. At E. by S. 
from us it made the appearance which I have here adjoined. 
All the mainland hereabouts lies very low and flat, and is 



GORGONILLA; GALLO 



347 



in very many places overflowed and drowned every high- 
water. 




GORGONILLA 

On Saturday, July 31st, in the morning the island Del 
Gallo, at E.N.E. being distant about 8 leagues, gave us this 
appearance : — 




Gallo. Another Prospect thereof 



The point of Mangroves is a low and level point, running 
out S.S.W. This day, and the night before it, we lost by our 
computation 3 leagues of our way, which I believe happened 
because we stood out too far from the land, having stood off 
all night long. 

August 1st, which was Sunday, we had a very fresh wind at 
W.S.W. This was joined also with several small showers of 
rain which fell that day. In the meanwhile we got pretty 
well to windward with it, by making small trips to and fro, 
which we performed most commonly, by standing in three 
glasses and as many out. 

The next day, August 2nd, in the morning, we came up 
into the highland of Santiago, where begins the highland 
of this coast. We kept at the distance of ten leagues 
from it, making continual short trips, as was mentioned 
before. The next day likewise we continued to do the 
same. But the weather was cloudy and for the most part 
full of rain. 

Wednesday, August 4th, we continued still turning in the 
wind'.s eye, as we had done for two days before. This day, 
in the afternoon, we discovered three hills at E.N.E. of our 
ship. These hills make the land of San Matteo, which gives 
this following appearance : — 



348 



CAPE OF SAN FRANCISCO 




San Matteo 



All the coast along hereabouts is highland. That evening 
also we saw the cape of San Francisco. At first this cape 
appeared like two several islands. But two hours after, at 
the distance of 12 leagues, at S. by W. it looked thus : — 




Cape of San Francisco 



Thursday, August 5th, we being then about the cape, it 
looked very like unto Beachy Head in England. It is full 
of white cliffs on all sides. The land turns off here to E. of S., 
and makes a large and deep bay, the circumference whereof 
is full of pleasant hills. In the bight of the bay are two high 
and rocky islands, which represent exactly two ships with their 
sails full. We were now come out of the rainy countries into 
a pleasant and fair region, where we had for the most part 
a clear sky and dry weather. Only now and then we could 
here find a small mist, which soon would vanish away. In 
the meanwhile every night a great dew used to fall, which 
supplied the defect of rain. 

The two next days following we continued plying to wind- 
ward with fair weather, nothing else remarkable happening 
in them which might deserve any notice to be taken thereof. 

On Sunday, August 8ch, we came close under a wild and 
mountainous country. This day likewise we saw Cape 
Passao at the distance of 10 leagues, more or less, to wind- 
ward of us. Ever since we came on this side Mangrove point 
we had observed a windward current did run all along as we 
sailed. Under shore the land is full of white chffs and groves, 
lower towards the pitch of the cape. 

The next day we had both a fair day and a fresh wind to 
help us on our voyage. We observed that Cape Passao 



CAPE PASSAO 349 

makes three points, between which are two bays. The 
leeward-most of the two is of the length of 3 leagues, and 
the other of 4. Adjoining unto the bays is seen a pleasant 
valley. Our prisoners informed us that northward of these 
capes live certain Indians, who sell maize and other pro- 
visions to any ships that happen to come in there. The Cape 
itself is a continuous cliff, covered with several sorts of shrubs 
and low bushes. Under these cliffs lies a sandy bay of the 
depth of 40 feet. The Spaniards say that the wind is always 
here between the S.S.W. and W.S.W. The cape represents 
with much hkeliness the brow of an alligator or cayman. At 
S. Cape Passao appears thus : — 




Cape Passao 



Tuesday, August loth. This morning the sky was so thick 
and hazy that we could not see the highland, though it were 
just before us, and not altogether two leagues distant from us. 
But, as soon as it cleared up, we stood in towards the land 
until we came within a mile of the shore. Here, having 
sounded, w^e found seven-fathom-and-a-half of water, under 
which was a light and clayey ground. The coast all along is 
very mountainous and likewise full of high and towering 
cliffs. When we sounded, the tide was almost at low-water. 
Here it ebbs and flows nearly four fathom perpendicular. 
From this cape the land runs along S.E. for the space of three 
or four leagues, with huge highland cUffs, like those of Calais 
over against England. Being past this cape, the highland 
S. from us is Cape St LawTence. 

August nth we found ourselves N.N.W. from Monte de 
Christo, a very high and round hill. Thence to windward is 
seen a very pleasant country, with spots here and there of 
woody land, which cause the country all over to look like so 
many enclosures of ripe cornfields. To leeward of the said 
hill the land is all high and hilly, with white cliffs at the sea- 
side. The coast runs S.W. till it reaches to a point of land 



350 



CAPE ST LAWRENCE 



within which is the port of Manta, as it is called. This port 
of Manta is nothing else than a settlement of Spaniards and 
Indians together where ships that want provisions call in and 
are furnished with several necessaries. About 6 or 7 leagues 
to windward of this port is Cape St Lawrence, butting out 
into the sea, being in form like the top of a church. Monte de 
Christo gives this appearance at sea : — 




Monte de Christo 



LAT. 50. 5. 



The cape rises higher and higher from the port of Manta. 
As we sailed along we saw multitudes of grampuses every 
day ; also water-snakes of divers colours. Both the Spaniards 
and Indians are very fearful of these snakes, believing there 
is no cure for their bitings. At the distance of eight leagues, 
or thereabouts, to leeward of Cape St Lawrence it appears 
thus : — 




Cape St. Lawrence 



LAT. 55. S. 



This day before night we came within sight of Manta. 
Here we saw the houses of the town belonging to the port, 
which were not above twenty or thirty Indian houses, lying 
under the windward and the mount. We were not willing 
to be descried by the inhabitants of the said place, and stood 
off to sea again. 

On Thursday, August 12th, in the morning, we saw the 
Island of Plate at S.W. at the distance of five-leagues, more 
or less. It appeared to us to be an even land. Having made 
this island, we resolved to go thither and refit our rigging, 
and get some goats which there run wild up and down the 
country. For, as was said before, at this time we had no 
other provision than Hour and water. The island itself is 



THE ISLE OF PLATE (DRAKE'S ISLE) 351 

indifferent highland and off at sea looks thus, as is here 
described : — 




Isle of Plate 



LAT. 2. 42. 5. 



But the highland of Cape Passao, of which we have spoken 
before, at the distance of 15 leagues to N., gives in several 
hummocks this appearance : — 




Highland of Cape Passao 

The land of Cape St Lawrence is all white cliffs, the head of 
the cape running N. and S. This day several great whales 
came up to us, and dived under our ship. One of these 
whales followed our ship from two in the afternoon till dark 
night. 

The next morning very early, at about six o'clock, we 
came under the aforesaid Isle of Plate, and here unexpectedly, 
to our great joy, we found at anchor the ship of Captain Cox 
with his whole company, whom we had lost at sea for the 
space of a whole fortnight before. We found they had reached 
this island, and had been there at anchor four days before 
us, being now just ready to depart thence. At about seven 
we came to anchor, and then the other vessel sent us a live 
tortoise and a goat to feast upon that day, telling us withal 
of great store of tortoises to be found ashore upon the bays 
and of much fish to be caught hereabouts. The island is very 
steep on all sides, insomuch that there is landing only on the 
N.E. side thereof, where is a gully, nigh unto which we 
anchored in 12 fathom water. Here at the distance of a 
furlong, or little more, from the shore as you go to land, you 
will see on the left hill a cross still standing there erected 
in former times. No trees are to be found on the whole 
island, but only low shrubs, on which the goats feed, which 
cattle is here very numerous. The shore is bold and hard, 
neither is there any water to be found upon it, excepting 



i,Si THE ISLE OF PLATE (DRAKE'S ISLE) 

only on the S.W. side of the island, where it cannot be come 
at, lying so much enclosed by the rocks and too great a sea 
hindering the approach to it in boats. 

This island received its name from Sir Francis Drake and 
his famous actions, for here it is reported by tradition that he 
made the dividend, or sharing, of that quantity of plate 
which he took in the Armada of this sea, distributing it to 
each man of his company by whole bowls full. The Spaniards 
afhrm to this day that he took at that time twelve-score tons 
of plate and i6 bowls of coined money a man, his number 
then being 45 men in all — insomuch that they were forced 
to heave much of it overboard, because his ship could not 
carry it all. Hence was this island called by the Spaniards 
themselves the Isle of Plate, from this great dividend ; and 
by us Drake's Isle. 

All along as we sailed we found the Spanish pilots to be 
very ignorant of the coasts. But they plead thus much for 
their ignorance, that the merchants, their employers, either of 
Mexico, Lima, Panama, or other parts, will not entrust one 
pennyworth of goods on that man's vessel that corks her, 
for fear she should miscarry. Here our prisoners told us Uke- 
wise that in the time of Oliver Cromwell, or the Commonwealth 
of England, a certain ship was fitted out of Lima with 70 
brass guns, having on board her no less than thirty millions 
of dollars, or pieces-of-eight, all which vast sum of money 
was given by the merchants of Lima, and sent as a present 
to our gracious King (or rather his father) who now reigneth, 
to supply him in his exile and distress ; but that this great 
and rich ship was lost by keeping along the shore in the 
Bay of Manta above-mentioned, or thereabouts. What truth 
there may be in this history I cannot easily tell : at least it 
seems to me as scarce deserving any credit. 

At this island we took out of Mr Cox's ship the old Moor 
(for of that nation he was) who pretended he would be our 
pilot to Arica. This was done lest we should have the mis- 
fortune of losing the company of Cox's vessel, as we had 
done before, our ship being the biggest in burden and having 
the greatest number of men. Captain Peralta admired 
oftentimes that we were got so far to windward in so little 
space of time ; whereas they had been, he said, many times 
three or four months in reaching to this distance from our 



WILD-GOATS; TORTOISES 353 

departure. Their long and tedious voyages, he added, were 
occasioned by their keeping at too great a distance from the 
shore. Moreover, he told us, that had we gone to the islands 
of Galapagos, as we were once determined to do, we had 
met in that voyage with many calms and such currents that 
many ships have by them been lost and never heard of to this 
day. This Island of Plate is about two-leagues in length, 
and very full of both deep and dangerous bays, as also such 
as we call gullies in these parts. The circumference and 
description of the said island is exactly thus : — 



^-^''Wi^. 




We caught at this island and salted good number of goats 
and tortoises. One man standing here on a little bay in one 
day turned 17 tortoises, besides which number our mosquito- 
strikers brought us in several more. Captain Sharp, our 
Commander, showed himbclf very ingenious in striking them, 
he performhig it as well as the tortoise-strikers themselves. 
For these creatures here are so little fearful that they offer not 
to sink from the fisherm.en, but lie still until such time as they 
are struck. But we found that the tortoises on this side 
were not so large, nor so sweet to the taste, as those on the 
North side of the island. Of goats we have taken, killed, 
and salted, above 100 in a day, and that without any labour. 
While we stayed here we made a square maintopsail yard. 
We cut also six feet off our bowsprit, and three feet more off 
our head. Most of the time that we remained here we had 
hazy weather. Only now and then the sun would happen to 
break out, and then to shine so hot that it burnt the skin off 
the necks of several of our men. As for me, my Hps were 
burnt in such a manner that they were not well in a whole 
week afterwards. 



2 A 



CHAPTER XII 

Captain Sharp and his company depart from the Isle of Plate in 
prosecution of their voyage towards Arica. They take two 
Spanish vessels by the way, and learn intelligence from the 
enemy. Eight of their company destroyed at the Isle of Gallo. 
Tediousness of this voyage, and great hardships they endured. 
Description of the coast all along, and their sailings 

Having taken in at the isle of Plate what provisions and 
other necessaries we could get, we set sail thence on Tuesday, 
August 17th, 1679, in prosecution of our voyage and designs 
above-mtntioiied, to take and plunder the vastly rich town 
of Arica. This day we sailed so well, and the same we did 
for several others afterwards, that we were forced to lie by 
several times, besides reefing our topsails, to keep our other 
ship company, lest we should lose her again. 

The next morning, about break of day, we found ourselves 
to be at the distance of 7 or 8 leagues to the Westward of the 
island whence we had departed, standing W. by S. with a 
S. by W. wind. About noon that day we had laid the land. 
After dinner the wind came S.S.W. at which time we were 
forced to stay more than once for the other vessel belonging 
to our company. 

On the following day we continued in like manner a West 
course all the day long. Sometimes this day the wind would 
change, but then in a quarter-of-an-hour it would return to 
S.S.W^ again. Hereabouts where we now were we observed 
great ripplings of the sea. 

August 20th, yesterday in the afternoon about six o'clock, 
we stood in S.E., but all night and all this day, we had very 
small winds. We found still that we gained very much on 
the small ship, which did not a little both perplex and hinder 
us in our course. 

354 



THE ISLE OF SOLANGO 



3SS 



The next day likewise we stood in S.K. by S., though with 
very httle wind, which sometimes varied, as was mentioned 
above. That day I finished two quadrants, each of which 
were two-feet-and-a-half radius. Here we had in Uke manner, 
as has been mentioned on other days of our saihngs, very 
many dolphins, and other sorts of fish swimming about our 
ship. 

On the morning following we saw again the island of Plate 
at N.E. of our ship, giving us this appearance at that distance 
of prospect : — 




Isle of Plate 

The same day at the distance of six-leagues, more or less, 
from the said island, we saw another island, called Solango. 
This isle lies close in by the mainland. In the evening we 
observed it to bear E.N.E. from us. Our course was S.E. 
by S. and the wind at S.W. by S. This day likewise we 
found that our lesser ship was still a great hindrance to our 
saihng, being forced to lie by, and stay for her two or three 
hours every day. We found likewise that, the farther from 
shore we were, the less wind we had all along, and that under 
the shore we were always sure of a fresh gale, though not so 
favourable to us as we could wish it to be. Hitherto we had 
used to stand off 40 leagues, and yet notwithstanding, in the 
space of six days, we had not got above ten leagues on our 
voyage, from the place of our departure. 

August 23rd : this day the wind was S.W. by S. and 
S.S.W. In the morning we stood off. The island of Solango, 
at N.E. by N. appears thus : — 




IsLS OF Solango 



As S. by W., and about six leagues distance from us, we 
descried a long and even hill. I took it to be an island, and 
conjectured it might be at least eight leagues distant from 
the continent. But afterwaids we found it was a point of 



356 ST HELENA 

land joining to the main, and is called Point St Helena, being 
continued by a piece of land which lies low, and in several 
places is almost drowned from sight, so that it cannot be seen 
at two leagues distance. In this lowland the Spaniards have 
conveniences for making pitch, tar, , salt, and some other 
things, for which purpose they have several houses here, 
and a friar who serves them as their chaplain. From the 
island of Solango to this place are reckoned eleven leagues, 
more or less. The land is hereabouts indifferent high, and is 
likewise full of bays. We had this day very Httle wind to 
help us in our voyage, excepting what blasts came now and 
then in snatches. These sometimes would prove pretty fair 
to us, and allow us for some little while a South course. But 
our chief course was S.E. by S. The point of St Helena at 
S. half E. and at about 6 leagues distance gives exactly this 
appearance as follows : — 




PuNTA DE Santa Helena 



Here we found no gieat current of the sea to move anyway. 
At the isle of Plata, afore-described, the sea ebbs and flows 
nearly 13 feet perpendicular. About four leagues to leeward 
of this point is a deep bay, having a quay at the mouth of it 
which takes up the better part of its width. In the deepest 
part of the bay on shore we saw a great smoke, which was 
at a village belonging to the bay, to which place the people 
were removed from the point above-mentioned. This after- 
noon we had a small Westerly wind, our course being S.S.W. 
Hereabouts it is all along a very bold shore. At three o'clock 
in the afternoon we tacked about to clear the point. Being 
now a httle way without the point, we spied a sail, which we 
conceived to be a bark. Hereupon we hoisted out our canoe, 
and sent in purstiit of her, which made directly for the shore. 
But the sail proved to be nothing else than a pair of bark- 
logs ^, which, arriving on shore, the men spread their sail on 

^ The modern balsa, balza : cf. Hakluyt, Voyages [1600], vol. iii, 
p. 416 : " . . . it was so well peopled with Indians, which had so many 
canoas of wood, as we might discerne, and not raftes or balsas, for so 
they call those floats which are made all flat with canes." 



THE CITY OF GUAYAQUIL 357 

the sand of the bay to dry. At the same time there came 
down on the shore an Indian on horseback, who hallooed 
to our canoe, which had followed the logs. But our men, 
fearing to discover who we were, in case they went too near 
the shore, left the design and returned back to us. In these 
parts the Indians have no canoes, nor any wood indeed that 
may be thought fit to make them of. Had we been descried 
by these poor people, they would in all probability have been 
very fearful of us. But they offered not to stir, which gave 
us to understand they knew us not. We could perceive 
from the ship a great path leading to the hills, so that we 
beUeved this place to be a look-out, or watch-place, for the 
security of Guayaquil. Between four and five we doubled 
the point, and then we descried the Point Chandy, at the 
distance of six leagues S.S.E. from this point. At first sight 
it seemed like to a long island, but withal, lower than that of 
St Helena. 

Tuesday, August 24th, at noon, we took the other ship, 
wherein Captain Cox sailed in tow, she being every day a 
greater hindrance than before to our voyage. Thus, about 
three in the afternoon we lost sight of land, in standing 
over for Cape Blanco. Here we found a strong current to 
move to the S.W. The wind was at S.W. by S., our course 
being S. by E. At the upper end of this gulf, which is framed 
by the two capes aforementioned, stands the city of Guaya- 
quil, being a very rich place, and the emharcadero, or sea-port, 
to the great city of Quito. To this place Hkewise many of 
the merchants of Lima do usually send the money they 
design for Old Spain in barks, and by that means save the 
custom that otherwise they would pay to the King by carrying 
it on board the fleet. Hither comes much gold from Quito, 
and very good and strong broadcloth, together with images 
for the use of the churches, and several other things of con- 
siderable value. But more especially coco-nut, whereof 
chocolate is made, which is supposed here to be the best in 
the whole universe. The town of Guayaquil consists of about 
150 great houses, and twice as many Httle ones. This was 
the town to which Captain Sawkins intended to make his 
voyage, as was mentioned above. When ships of greater 
burden come into this gulf, they anchor outside Lapina, and 
then put their lading into lesser vessels to carry it to the 



358 THEY CAPTURE A SPANISH BARK 

town. Towards the evening of this day a small breeze sprang 
up, varying from point to point, after which, about nine 
o'clock at night, we tacked about, and stood off to sea, W. 
by N. 

As soon as we had tacked, we happened to spy a sail N.N.E. 
from us. Hereupon we instantly cast off our other vessel 
which we had in tow, and stood round about after them. 
We came very near to the vessel before the people saw us, 
by reason of the darkness of the night. As soon as they spied 
us, they immediately clapped on a wind, and sailed very 
well before us, insomuch that it was a pretty while before we 
could come up with them and within call. We hailed them in 
Spanish, by means of an Indian prisoner, and commanded 
them to lower their top-sails. They answered they would 
soon make us to lower our own. Hereupon we fired several 
guns at them, and they as thick at us again with their harque- 
buses^. Thus they fought us for the space of half-an-hour 
or more, and would have done it longer, had we not killed 
the man at the helm, after which none of the rest dared to 
be so hardy as to take his place. With another of our shot 
we cut in pieces and disabled their main-top halliards. Here- 
upon they cried out for quarter, which we gave them, and 
entered their ship. Being possessed of the vessel, we found 
in her five-and-thirty men, of which number 24 were natives 
of Old Spain. They had one-and- thirty firearms on board the 
ship for their defence. They had only fought us, as they 
declared afterwards, out of bravado, having promised on 
shore so to do, in case they met us at sea. The Captain of 
this vessel was a person of quality, and his brother, since 
the death of Don Jacinto de Barabona, killed by us in the 
engagement before Panama, was now made Admiral of 
the sea-armada. With him we took also in this bark five 
or six other persons of quality. They did us in this fight, 
though short, very great damage in our rigging, by cutting 
it in pieces, besides which they wounded two of our men, 
and a third man was wounded by the negligence of one of 
our own men, occasioned by a pistol which went off un- 
advisedly. About eleven o'clock this night we stood off to 
the west. 

1 An early kind of hand-gun. Other early spellings are : arkbusshe, 
ha(c)quebute, hargubush, harquebuz(e), herquebuze, hagabus, etc ! 



THE SPANISH CAPTAIN^S RELATION 359 

The next morning, about break of day, we hoisted out our 
canoe, and went aboard the bark which we had taken the 
night before. We transported on board our own ship more 
of the prisoners taken in the said vessel, and began to examine 
them, to learn what intelligence we could from them. The 
Captain of the vessel, who was a very civil and meek gentle- 
man, satisfied our desires in this point very exactly, saying 
to us : 

Gentlemen, I am now your prisoner-at-war by the over-ruling 
providence of fortune, and, moreover, am very well satisfied that 
no money whatsoever can procure my ransom, at least for the 
present at your hands. Hence I am persuaded it is not my 
interest to tell you a lie, which if I do I desire you to punish me 
as severely as you shall think fit. We heard of your taking and de- 
stroying our Armadilla and other ships at Panama, about six 
weeks after that engagement, by two several barks which arrived 
here thence. But they could not inform us whether you designed 
to come any farther to the southward, but, rather, desired we would 
send them speedily all the help by sea that we could. Hereupon 
we sent the noise and rumour of your being in these seas by land 
to Lima, desiring they would expedite what succours they could 
send to join with ours. We had at that time in our harbour 
two or three great ships, but all of them very unfit to sail. For 
this reason at Lima the Viceroy of Peru pressed three great 
merchant ships, into the biggest of which he put 14 brass guns, 
into the second 10, and in the other 6. To these he added two 
barks, and put 750 soldiers on board them all. Of this number 
of men they landed eight-score at Point St Helena, all the rest 
being carried down to Panama, with design to fight you there. 
Besides these forces, two other men-of-war, bigger than the 
aforementioned, are still lying at Lima, and fitting out there in 
all speed to follow and pursue you. One of these men-of-war is 
equipped with 36 brass guns, and the other with 30. These ships, 
besides their complement of seamen, have 400 soldiers added to 
them by the Viceroy. Another man-of-war belonging to this 
number, and lesser than the aforementioned, is called the Patache. 
This ship consists of 24 guns, and was sent to Arica to fetch the 
King's plate thence. But the Viceroy, having received intelli- 
gence of your exploits at Panama, sent for this ship back from 
there with such haste that they came away and left the money 
behind them. Hence the Patache now lies at the port of Callao, 
ready to sail on the first occasion or news of your arrival there- 
abouts, they having for this purpose sent to all parts very strict 
orders to keep a good, look-out on all sides, and all places along 



36o THE SPANISH CAPTAIN'S RELATION 

the coasts. Since this, from Manta they sent us word that they 
had seen two ships at sea pass hy that place. And from the 
Goat Key also we heard that the Indians had seen you, and 
that they were assured one of your vessels was the ship called 
La Trinidad, which you had taken before Panama, as being a 
ship very well known in these seas. Hence we concluded that 
your design was to ply, and make your voyage thereabouts. Now 
this bark wherein you took us prisoners, being bound for Panama, 
the Governor of Guayaquil sent us out before her departure, if 
possible to discover you, which, if we did, we were to run the 
bark on shore and get away, or else to fight you with these soldiers 
and firearms that you see. As soon as we heard of your being 
in these seas, we built two forts, the one of six guns, and the other 
of four, for the defence of the town. At the last muster taken in 
the town of Guayaquil we had there 850 men of all colours, but 
when we came out, we left only 200 men that were actually under 
arms. 

Thus ended the relation of that worthy gentleman. About 
noon that day we unrigged the bark which we had taken, 
and after so doing sunk her. Then we stood S.S.E., and after- 
wards S. by W. and S.S.W. That evening we saw point 
St Helena at N. half E., at the distance of nine leagues, more 
or less. 

The next day, being August 26th, in the morning we stood 
S. That day we cried out all our pillage, and found that it 
amounted to 3,276 pieces-of-eight, which was accordingly 
divided by shares amongst us. We also punished a friar, 
who was chaplain to the bark aforementioned, and shot him 
upon the deck, casting him overboard before he was dead. 
Such cruelties, though I abhorred very much in my heart, 
yet here was I forced to hold my tongue and contradict 
them not, as having not authority to oversway them. At 
ten o'clock this morning we saw land again, and the pilot 
said we were sixteen leagues to leeward of Cabo Blanco. 
Hereupon we stood off and on, close under the shore, which 
all appeared to be barren land. 

The morning following we had very little wind, so that 
we advanced but slowly all that day. To windward of us we 
could perceive the continent to be all high land, being whitish 
clay, full of white cliffs. This morning, in common discourse, 
our prisoners confessed to us and acknowledged the destruc- 
tion of one of our little barks, which we lost on our way to 



CAPE BLANCO 361 

the island of Cayboa. They stood away, as it appeared by 
their information, for the Goat Key, thinking to find us there, 
as having heard Captain Sawkins say that he would go thither. 
On their way they happened to fall in with the island of Gallo, 
and understanding its weakness by their Indian pilot, they 
ventured on shore and took the place, carrying away three 
white women in their company. But, after a small time of 
cruising, they returned again to the aforesaid island, where 
they stayed two or three days, after which they went out 
to sea again. Within three or four days they came to a little 
quay four leagues distant from this isle. But, whilst they 
had been out and in thus several times, one of their prisoners 
made his escape to the mainland, and brought off thence 
50 men with firearms. These, placing themselves in ambush, 
at the first volley killed six of the seven men that belonged 
to the bark. The other man that was left took quarter of 
the enemy, and he it was that discovered to them our design 
upon the town of Guayaquil. By an observation which we 
made this day we found ourselves to be in lat. 3° 50". At this 
time, our prisoners told us there was an embargo laid on all 
the Spanish ships, commanding them not to stir out of the 
ports, for fear of their falling into our hands at sea. 

Saturday, August 28th. This morning we took out all the 
water, and most part of the flour that was in Captain Cox's 
vessel. The people in like manner came on board our ship. 
Having done this, we made a hole in the vessel and left her 
to sink, with a small old canoe at her stern. To leeward of 
Manta, a league from shore, in 18 fathom water, there runs 
a great current outwards. About eleven in the forenoon we 
weighed anchor, with a wind at W.N.W. turning it out. 
Our number now in all being reckoned, we found ourselves 
to be 140 men, two boys, and 55 prisoners, being all now 
in one and the same bottom. This day we got six or seven 
leagues in the wind's eye. 

h All the day following we had a very strong S.S.W. wind, 
insomuch that we were forced to sail with two reefs in our 
main-top sail and one also in our fore-top sail. Here Captain 
Peralta told us that the first place which the Spaniards settled 
in these parts, after Panama, was Tumbes, a place that now 
was to leeward of us, in this gulf where we now were. That 
there a priest went .ashore with a cross in his hand, while 



362 THE PRIEST, LIONS, AND TIGERS 

10,000 Indians stood gazing at him. Being landed on the 
strand, there came out of the woods two Hons ; and he laid 
the cross gently on their backs, and they instantly fell down 
and worshipped it : and moreover, that two tigers, following 
them, did the same — whereby these animals gave to the 
Indians to understand the excellency of the Christian religion, 
which they soon after embraced. About four in the evening 
we came abreast the cape, which is the highest part of all. 
The land hereabouts appeared to be barren and rocky. At 
3 leagues distance east from us the cape showed thus : — 




Cape Blanco 

Were it not for a windward current which runs under the 
shore hereabouts, it were totally impossible for any ships to get 
about this cape, there being such a great current to leeward 
in the offing. In the last bark which we took, of which we 
spoke in this chapter, we made prisoner one Nicolas Moreno, a 
Spaniard by nation, who was esteemed to be a very good pilot 
of the South Sea. This man did not cease continually to praise 
our ship for her sailing, and especially for the alterations we 
had made in her. As we went along, we observed many bays 
to lie between this cape and Point Parina, of which we shall 
soon make mention hereafter. 

In the night the wind came about to S.S.E. and we had 
a very stiff gale of it ; so that by break of day the next 
morning we found ourselves to be about 5 leagues distant to 
windward of the cape aforementioned. The land hereabouts 
makes three or four several bays, and grows lower and lower 
the nearer we came to Punta Parina. This point looks at 
first sight Uke two islands. Between four and five of the 
clock that evening we were W. from the said point. 

The next day likewise, being the last day of August, the 
wind still continued S.S.E. as it had done the whole day 
before. This day we thought it convenient to stand farther 



I 



POINT PARINA 



363 



out to sea, for fear of being descried at Paita, which now was 
not very far distant from us. The morning proved to be 
hazy — but about eleven we spied a sail, which stood then 
just as we did E. by S. Coming nearer to it, by degrees we 
found her to be nothing else than a pair of bark-logs under 
a sail, which were going that way. Our pilot advised us not 
to meddle with those logs, nor mind them in the least, for it 
was very doubtful whether we should be able to come up 
with them or not, and then by giving chase to them we should 
easily be descried and known to be the English pirates, as 
they called us. These bark-logs sail excellently well for the 
most part, and some of them are of such a size that they 
will carry 250 packs of meal from the valleys to Panama 
without wetting any of it. This day, by an observation made, 
we found ourselves to be in lat. 4° 55' S. Point Parina at 
N.E. by E., and at the distance of 6 leagues, more or less, 
gives this following appearance : — 




PuNTA Parina 



At the same time La Silla de Paita bore from us S.E. by 
E., being distant only 7 or 8 leagues. It had the form of a 
high mountain, and appeared thus to us : — 




La Silla de Paita 



The town of Paita itself is situated in a deep bay, about 
2 leagues to leeward of this hill. It serves for an emharcadero, 
or port-town, to another great place which is distant thence 
about 13 leagues higher in the country and is called Piura, 
seated in a very barren country. 

On Wednesday, September ist, our course was S. by W. 
The midnight before this day we had a land-wind that sprang 



364 LA SILLA DE PAITA 

up. In the afternoon La Silla de Paita, at the distance of 
7 leagues, at E. by N. appeared thus : — 




La Silla de Paita 

All along hereabouts is nothing but barren land, as was 
said before : likewise, for three or four days last past, we 
observed along the coasts many seals. 

That night as we sailed we saw something that appeared 
to us to be as it were a light. And the next morning we spied 
a sail, whence we judged the light had come. The vessel 
was at the distance of six leagues from us, in the wind's eye, 
and thereupon we gave her chase. She stood to windward 
as we did. This day we had an observation, which gave us 
lat. 5° 30' S. At night we were about 4 leagues to leeward of 
her, but so great a mist fell that we suddenly lost sight of her. 
At this time the weather was as cold with us as in England 
in November. Every time we went about with our ship the 
other did the like. Our pilot told us that this ship set forth 
from Guayaquil eleven days before they were taken, and 
that she was laden with rigging, woollen and common cloth, 
and other manufactures made at Quito. Moreover, that he 
had heard that they had spent a mast, and had put into 
Paita to refit it. 

The night following they showed us several lights through 
their negligence, which they ought not to have done, for by 
that means we steered directly after them. The next morn- 
ing she was more than 3 leagues in the wind's eye distant 
from us. Had they suspected us, it could not be doubted 
but they would have made away towards the land, but they 
seemed not to fly nor stir for our chase. The land here all 
along is level, and not very high. The weather was hazy, 
so that at about eleven o'clock that morning we lost sight 
of her. At this time we had been for the space of a whole 
week, at an allowance of only two draughts of water each 
day, so scarce were provisions with us. That afternoon we 
saw the vessel again, and at night we were not full two leagues 



CAPTURE OF THE SPANISH SHIP 365 

distant from her, and not more than half-a-league to leeward. 
We made short trips all the night long. 

On Saturday, September 4th, about break of day, we saw 
the ship again at the distance of a league, more or less, and 
not above a mile to windward of us. They stood out as soon 
as they espied us, and we stood directly after them. Having 
pursued them for several hours, about four o'clock in the 
afternoon, we came up within the distance of half our small- 
arms shot, to windward of them. Hereupon they, perceiving 
who we were, presently lowered all their sails at once, and 
we cast dice among ourselves for the first entrance. The lot 
fell to larboard, so that 20 men belonging to that watch 
entered her. In the vessel were found 50 packs of coco-nut, 
such as chocolate is made of, many packs of raw silk, Indian 
cloth, and thread stockings : these things being the principal 
part of her cargo. We stood out S.W. by S. all the night 
following. 

The next day being come, we transported on board our 
ship the chief part of her lading. In her hold we found some 
rigging, as had been told us by Nicholas Moreno, our pilot, 
taken in the former vessel off Guayaquil ; but the greatest 
part of the hold was full of timber. We took out of her also 
some osnaburgs^, of which we made top-gallant sails, as shall 
be said hereafter. It was now nineteen days, as they told us, 
since they had set sail from Guayaquil, and then they had 
only heard there of our exploits before Panama, but did not 
so much as think of our coming so far to the southward, 
which did not give them the least suspicion of us, though 
they had seen us for the space of two or three days before at 
sea and always steering after them — otherwise they had 
made for the land, and endeavoured to escape our hands. 

The next morning, likewise, we continued to take in the 
remaining part of what goods we desired out of our prize. 
When we had done, we sent most of our prisoners on board 
the said vessel, and left only their foremast standing, all the 
rest being cut down by the board. We gave them a foresail 
to sail withal, all their own water, and some of our flour to 
serve them for provisions, and thus we turned them away, 
not caring to be troubled or encumbered with too many of 
their company. Notwithstanding, we detained still several 

^ Coarse linens, originally exported from Osnaburg, in Cciir.any. 



Z66 THE VOYAGE TOWARDS ARICA 

of the chief of our prisoners. Such were Don Thomas de 
Argandona, who was Commander of the vessel taken before 
Guayaquil, Don Christoval, and Don Baltazar, both gentle- 
men of quahty taken with him, Captain Peralta, Captain Juan 
Moreno, the pilot, and twelve slaves, of whom we intended 
to make good use, to do the drudgery of our ship. At this 
time I reckoned that we were about the distance of 35 leagues, 
little more or less, from land ; moreover, by an observation 
made this day, we found lat. 7° i' S. Our plunder being 
over and our prize turned away, we sold both chests, boxes, 
and several other things at the mast, by the voice of a crier. 

On the following day we stood S.S.W. and S.W. by S. all 
day long. That day one of our company died, named Robert 
Montgomery, the same man who was shot by the negligence 
of one of our own men with a pistol through the leg at the 
taking of the vessel before Guayaquil, as was mentioned 
above. We had an observation also this day, by which we 
now found lat. 7° 26' S. On the same day likewise we made 
a dividend, and shared all the booty taken in the last prize. 
This being done, we hoisted into our ship the launch which 
we had taken in her, as being useful to us. All these days 
last past it was observed that we had every morning a dark 
cloud in the sky, which in the North Sea would certainly 
foretell a storm — but here it always blew over. 

Wednesday, September 8th, in the morning, we threw our 
dead man above-mentioned into the sea, and gave him 
three French volleys for his funeral ceremony. In the night 
before this day we saw a light belonging to some vessel at 
sea, but we stood away from it, as not desiring to see any 
more sails to hinder us in our voyage towards Arica, whither 
now we were designed. This light was undoubtedly from 
some ship to leeward of us, but on the next morning we 
could descry no sail. Here I judged we had made a S.W. 
by S. way from Paita, and by an observation found 8° 00' S. 



CHAPTER XIII 

A continuation of their long and tedious voyage to Arica, with a 
description of the coasts and sailings thereunto. Great hard- 
ship they endured for want of water and other provisions. 
They are descried at Arica, and dare not land there — the 
country being all in arms before them. They retire thence, 
and go to Puerto de Hilo, close by Arica. Here they land, 
take the town with little or no loss on their side, refresh 
themselves with provisions, but in the end are cheated by 
the Spaniards, and forced shamefully to retreat thence 

On September 9th we continued still to make a S.W. by S. 
way, as we had done the day before. By a clear and exact 
observation, taken the same day, we found now lat. 8° 12' S. 
All the twenty-four hours last past afforded us but little wind, 
so that we advanced but little on our voyage, and were forced 
to tack about every four or five hours. 

The next day, by another observation taken, we found 
then lat. 9° 00' S. Now the weather was much warmer than 
before, and with this warmth we had small and misty rains 
that frequently fell. That evening a strong breeze came 
up at S.E. by E. 

The night following, likewise, we had a very great dew 
that fell, and a fresh wind continued to blow. At this time 
we were all hard at work to make small sails of the osnaburgs 
we had taken in the last prize, as being much more convenient 
for then: lightness. The next morning being Saturday, 
September nth, we lay by to mend our rigging. These last 
twenty-four hours we had made a S. by W. way. And now 
we had an observation that gave us lat. 10° 9' S. I supposed 
this day that we were west from Cosmey, about the distance 
of eighty-nine leagues and a half. 

September 12th. This day we reckoned a S.S.W. way, 

367 



368 THE VOYAGE TO ARICA 

and that we had made 34 leagues and three-quarters, or 
thereabouts. Also that all our westing from Paita was 
eighty-four leagues. We supposed ourselves now to be in 
lat. 11° 40' S. But, the weather being hazy, no observation 
could be made. 

September 13th. Yesterday in the afternoon we had a 
great eclipse of the sun, which lasted from one o'clock till 
three after dinner. From this eclipse I then took the true 
judgment of our longitude from the Canary Islands, and 
found myself to be 285° 35', in lat. 11° 45' S. The wind was 
now so fresh that we took in our top-sails, making a great 
way under our courses and sprit-sail. 

September 14th we had a cloudy morning, which con- 
tinued so all the first part thereof. About eight it cleared 
up, and then we set our fore-topsail and, about noon, our 
main-topsail likewise. This was observable, that all this 
great wind precedent did not make anything of a great sea. 
We reckoned this day that we had run by a S.W. by W. way, 
26 leagues and two-thirds. 

The next day, in like manner, we had close weather, such 
as the former morning. Our reckoning was twenty-four 
leagues and two-thirds, by a S.W. by W. way. But, by obser- 
vation made, I found myself to be 23° S. of my reckoning, 
as being in the lat. of 15° 17' S. 

On the 1 6th we had but small and variable winds. For 
the twenty-four hours last past we reckoned 24 leagues and 
two-thirds, by a S.W. by S. way. By observation we had 
lat. 16° 41'. That evening we had a gale at E.S.E. which 
forced us to hand our top-sails. 

The 17th, likewise, we had many gusts of wind at several 
times, forcing us to hand our top-sails often. But in the 
forenoon we set them with a fresh gale at E.S.E. My reckon- 
ing this day was 31 leagues, by a S.S.W. way. All day long 
we stood by our top-sails. 

On the 1 8th we made a S. by W. way. We reckoned 
ourselves to be in lat. 19° 33' S. The weather was hazy, and 
the wind began to die this day by degrees. 

The next day, being the 19th, we had very small wind. 
I reckoned 13 leagues and a-half, by a S.W. by S. way, and 
our whole westing from Paita to be 164 leagues in lat. 20° 06' S. 
All the afternoon we had a calm, with drizzling rain. 



THE VOYAGE TO ARICA 369 

Monday, September 20th. Last night we saw the clouds, 
which are so famous among the Magellan mariners of these 
Southern seas. The least of these clouds was about the 
bigness of a man's hat. After this sight the morning was 
very clear. We had run at noon at E.S.E. 13 leagues and 
a-half, and, by an observation then made, we found lat. 
20° 15' S. This day the wind began to freshen at W. by S. 
Yet, notwithstanding, we had a very smooth sea. 

But on the next morning the wind came about to S.W., 
and yet slackened by degrees. At four this morning it came 
to S. by E., and at ten the same day to S.E. by S. We had 
had this day a clear observation, and by it lat. 20° 25' S. We 
stood now E. by N,, with the wind at S.E. 

September 22nd. This morning the wind was at E.S.E. 
By a clear observation we found lat. 19° 30' S. Likewise on 
a N.E. by E. way. 

September 23rd. We had a fresh wind and a high sea. 
This morning early the wind was at E. and about ten at 
E.N.E. From a clear observation we found our latitude to 
be 20° 35' S. The way we made was S. by W. That morning 
we happened to split our sprit-sail. 

Next morning the wind was variable and inconstant, 
and the weather but hazy. We reckoned a S. by E. way : 
this day we bent a new main-topsail, the old one serving 
for a fore-topsail. In the afternoon we had but little wind, 
whereupon we lowered our top-sails, having in like manner a 
very smooth sea. 

The following day, likewise, brought us calm and warm 
weather, which occasioned us to set up our shrouds both fore 
and aft. An observation taken this day afforded us lat. 
21° 57'. That evening we bent a sprit-sail. 

On September 26th an observation gave us lat. 22° 05' S. 
At noon we had a breeze at N.N.E., our course being E.S.E. 
In the afternoon we set up a larboard top-sail studding- 
sail. In the evening the wind came about at N. pretty 
fresh. 

The next day we had a smooth sea, and took in four 
studding-sails. For yesterday in the afternoon we had put 
out, besides that above-mentioned, another studding-sail and 
two main studding-sails more. This day we had by observa- 
tion 22° 45' S., having made by an E.S.E. way thirty-five 



370 THE VOYAGE TO ARICA 

leagues and a-half — our whole meridian difference 68 leagues 
and a-half. 

September 28th. All the forenoon we had very little wind, 
and yet withal a great southern sea. By observation we 
had lat. 22° 40' S. 

September 29th. All the night past we had much wind, 
with three or four fierce showers of rain. This was the first 
that we could call rain, ever since we left Cape Francisco 
above-mentioned. This day our allowance was shortened, 
and reduced to three-pints-and-a-half of water, and one 
cake of boiled bread to each man for a day. An observation 
this day gave us lat. 21° 59' S. by a N.E. by E. way. 

On September 30th we had a cloudy day, and the wind 
very variable, the morning being fresh. Our way was N.E. 
half N., wherein we made 18 leagues. 

October ist. All the night past and this day we had a 
cloudy sky and not much wind. We made a N.E. by E. way, 
and by it 17 leagues and two miles. This day we began at 
two-pints-and-a-half of water for a day. 

The 2nd, we made a E.N.E. way, and by it 26 leagues, 
more or less. Our observation this day gave us lat. 20° 29' S. 
I reckoned now that we were 10 leagues and a-half to E. of 
our meridian, the port of Paita, so that henceforward our 
departure was eastward. The wind was this day at S.E. by S. 

On the 3rd we had both a cloudy morning, a high sea, and 
drizzling weather. An observation which we had this day 
jave us lat. 19° 45' S. In the afternoon the wind blew so 
.resh that we were forced to hand our top-sails and sprit- 
sail. 

The 4th, likewise, we had a high sea and a cold wind. At 
break of day we set our top-sails. An observation made 
afforded us lat. 19° 8' S. Here we supposed ourselves fifty- 
nine leagues D.M. 

The 5th, we had still a great sea, and sharp and cold winds, 
forcing us to our low sails. By a N.E. by E. way we reckoned 
this day 26 leagues and a-half. 

But on the 6th we had great gusts of wind. Insomuch 
that this morning our ring-bolts gave way which held our 
main-stay, and had like to have brought our main-mast by the 
board. Hereupon we ran three or four glasses west before 
the wind. By an observation we found lat. 19° 4' S. 



THE VOYAGE TO ARICA 371 

On October 7th the wind had somewhat fallen. We had 
both a cloudy day and variable winds. 

The 8th of the said month we had again a smooth sea and 
small whiffling winds. This morning we saw a huge shoal 
of fish, two or three water-snakes, and several seals. 

On the next day we had in like manner a very smooth sea, 
and withal a cloudy day. Our course was E. 

October loth. We had likewise a cloudy day, with small 
and variable winds, and, what is consequent to these, a 
smooth sea. Our way was S. by E. This day we spied 
floating upon the sea several tufts of sea-grass, which gave 
us good hopes that we were not far from shore. In the after- 
noon we had a N.E. by E. wind that sprang up : the night 
was very cold and cloudy. 

On the nth we had a fresh wind at S.E. and E.S.E. together 
with a cloudy day, such as we had experienced for several 
days before. We reckoned this day 32 leagues by a N.E. by 
E. way. Here our pilot told us that the sky is always hazy 
near the shore upon these coasts where we now were. 

On October 12th we had a clear day, and N.E. way. 

The 13th we had but little wind. This day we saw a whale, 
which we took for an infallible token that we were not far 
distant from land, which now we hoped to see in a few days. 
We made an E.S.E. way, and by it we reckoned nineteen 
leagues. All the evening was very calm. 

Thursday, October 14th, we had both a calm and close 
day until the afternoon. Then the weather became very 
hot and clear. This day we saw several land- fowls, being 
but small birds, concerning which our pilot said that they 
use to appear about one or two days' sail from the land. 
Our reckoning was 11 leagues by an E.S.E. way. In the 
evening of this day we thought that we had seen land, but 
it proved to be nothing else than a fog-bank. 

October 15th. Both the night past and this day was very 
clear. We made an observation this day, which gave us 
lat. 18° 00' S. 

The i6th. Last night and this day were contrary to the 
former, both cloudy. Our way was N.E. by E. whereof we 
reckoned 13 leagues. 

Sunday, October 17th, the wind blew very fresh, our 
course being E.N.E. About five that morning we saw land, 



37^ 



THE POINT OF HILO 



but the weather was so hazy that at first we could scarce 
perceive whether it was land or not. It was distant from 
us about eight leagues, and appeared as a high and round 
hill, being in form like a sugar-loaf. We saw land afterwards 
all along to the S.E. by E. from it. In the evening, we being 
then within 5 leagues of the shore, the land appeared very 
high and steep. 

October i8th. All the night last past we stood off to sea 
with a fresh wind. This morning we could just see land at 
N.N.E. We reckoned a S.E. by E. way, and by observation 
we found lat. 17° 17' S. 

Tuesday, October 19th. We had very cloudy weather, 
finding what our pilot had told us to be very true concerning 
the haziness of this shore. We saw all along as we went 
very high land, covered with clouds, insomuch that we could 
not see its top. 

On Wednesday, the next day, we had hkewise cloudy 
weather, and for the most part calm. The same weather 
being very cloudy, as before, continued in like manner on 
Thursday. 

Friday, October 22nd. This morning we saw the land 
plain before us. Our pilot, being asked what land that was, 
answered it was the Point of Hilo. At N.N.E. and about 
6 or 7 leagues distance it appeared thus to us : — 




PuNTA DE Hilo 



LAT. 1 8** 4' 5. 



There is every morning and evening a brightness over 
the point which lasted for two or three hours, being caused 
by the reflection of the sun on the barren land, as it is sup- 
posed. This day we had but little wind, and the huge want 
of water we were now under occasioned much disturbance 
among our men. As for my part, I must acknowledge I 
could not sleep all night long through the greatness of my 
drought. We could wiUingly have landed here to seek for 
water, but the fear of being discovered and making ourselves 
known hindered us from so doing. Thus we unanimously 



THE POINT OF HILO 



373 



resolved to endure our thirst for a little longer. Hereabouts 
is a small current that runs under the shore. This morning 
we had but little wind at S., our course being E.S.E. The 
point at the distance of 5 leagues N.E. looks on the following 
side thus : — 




PUNTA DE HiLO 



Our wind continued to blow not about six hours each day. 
We reckoned the difference of our meridian to be this day 
180 leagues. Very great was our affliction now for want of 
water, we having but half-a-pint a day to our allowance. 

October 23rd. This day we were forced to spare one 
measure of water, thereby to make it hold out the longer, 
so scarce it became with us. At three this afternoon the point 
looked thus : — 




PUNTA DE HiLO 



Mora de Sama 



Here the point looks like an island, and Mora de Sama 
to the southward thereof, gives this appearance : — 




Mora de Sama 



At about nine o'clock at night we had a land wind, and 
with it we stood S.E. by S., but all the night after we had 
but little wind. 



374 MORA DE SAMA 

October 24th, All the night past we had very cloudy and 
dark weather, with mizzUng rain. The morning being come 
it cleared up, but all the land appeared covered with clouds. 
Yet, notwithstanding, in the afternoon it gave us again this 
appearance :— - 




Mora de Sama LAT. 18" 29' S. 

Under the hill of Mora de Sama are eighteen or nineteen 
white cliffs, which appear in the form thus described. This 
day we resolved that 112 men should go ashore, and at about 
eight this evening we sent our launch and four canoes, with 
four-score men, to take three or four fishermen at a certain 
river, close by Mora de Sama, called El Rio de Juan Diaz, 
with intent to gain what intelligence we could as to how affairs 
stood at present on the coast and country thereabouts. 

Monday, October 25th. Last night being about the distance 
of one-league-and-a-half from shore, we sounded, and found 
forty-five fathom water, with a hard ground at the bottom. 
This morning our people and canoes that were sent to take 
the fishermen returned, not being able to find either their 
houses or the river. They reported withal they had had a 
very fresh wind all the night long under shore, whereas we 
had not one breath of wind all night on board. 

Tuesday, October 26th, Last night, being the night before 
this day, about six o'clock we departed from the ship to go 
to take Arica, resolving to land about the distance of a league 
to windward of the town. We were about 6 leagues distant 
from the town when we left our ship, whereby we were forced 
to row all night, that we might reach the place of our landing 
before day. Towards morning the canoes left the launch, 
which they had had all night in tow and wherein I was, and 
made all the speed they possibly could for the shore, with 
design to land before the launch could arrive. But, being 
come nigh the place where we designed to land, they found 
to our great sorrow and vexation that we were descried, and 



THE APPROACH TO ARICA 375 

that all along the shore and through the country they had 
certain news of our arrival. Vet, notwithstanding our dis- 
covery, we would have landed if we could by any means 
have found a place to do it in. But the sea ran so high, and 
with such a force against the rocks, that our boats must have 
each been staved into one thousand pieces, and we in great 
danger of wetting our arms, if we should adventure to go on 
shore. The bay all round, and Hkewise the tops of the hills, 
was possessed by several parties of horse which seemed to be 
gathered there by a general alarm through the whole country, 
and they waited only for our landing, with design to make 
a strong opposition against us. They fired a gun at us, but 
we made them no answer, but rather returned to our ship, 
giving over this enterprise until a fairer opportunity. The 
hill of Arica is very white, being occasioned by the dung 
of multitudes of fowls that nest themselves in the hollow 
thereof. To leeward of the said hill lies a small island at the 
distance of a mile, more or less, from the shore. About 
half-a-league from that island we could perceive six ships to 
ride at anchor, four of which had their yards taken down 
from their masts, but the other two seemed to be ready to 
sail. We asked our pilot concerning these ships, and he 
told us that one of them was mounted with six guns, and the 
other with only four. Being disappointed of our expectations 
at Arica, we now resolved to bear away thence to the village 
of Hilo, there to take in water and other provisions, as also 
to learn what inteUigence we could obtain. All that night we 
lay under a calm. 

On October 27th, in the morning, we found ourselves to 
be about a league to windward of Mora de Sama. Yet, not- 
withstanding, the weather was quite calm, and we only 
drove with the current to leeward. The land between Hilo 
and Mora de Sama forms two several bays, and the coast 
runs along N.W. and S.E., as may appear by the following 
demonstration. Over the land we could see from our ship, 
as we drifted, the coming or rising of a very high land, at a 
great distance far up in the country. 

October 28th. The night before this day we sent away 
our four canoes with 50 men in them, to seize and plunder 
the town of Hilo. All that day was very calm, as the day 
before. 



376 THE PORT OF HILO 

The next morning, about break of day, a fair breeze sprang 
up, with which we lay right in with the port. About one in 
the afternoon we anchored, and the port Hes thus, as is here 
described : — 




Port of Hilo 

We cast anchor at the distance of two miles from the 
village, and then we perceived two flags, which our men had 
put out, having taken the town and set up our English colours. 
The Spaniards were retreated to the hills, and there had done 
the same. Being come to an anchor, our Commander, Captain 
Sharp, sent a canoe on board of us, and ordered that all the 
men our ship could spare should come ashore. Withal they 
told us that those of our party that landed the morning 
before were met by some horsemen on the shore, who only 
exchanged some few volleys of shot with our men, but were 
soon put to flight. That hereupon our forces had marched 
directly to the town, where the Spaniards, expecting we 
should have landed at first, had made a breastwork, thirty 
paces long, of clay and banks of sand. Here, in a small 
skirmish, we happened to kill an Indian, who told us before 
he died that they had received news of our coming nine days 
ago, from Lima, and but one day before from Arica. Having 
taken the town, we found therein great quantity of pitch, 
tar, oil, wine, and flour, with several other sorts of provisions. 
We endeavoured to keep as good a watch as the Spaniards 
did on the hills, fearing lest they should suddenly make an 
attempt to destroy us. 

On the next day, October 30th, we chose out three-score 
men of them who were the fittest to march, from among 
the rest, and ordered them to go up and search the valley 
adjoining and belonging to the town. We found the said 
valley to be very pleasant, being all over set with fig, olive, 
orange, lemon, and lime-trees, with many other fruits agree- 
able to the palate. About four miles up, within the valley, 
we came to a great sugar-works, or ingenio d'azucar, as it is 
called by the Spaniards, where we found great store of sugar. 



THE SUGAR-WORKS 377 

oil, and molasses, but most of the sugar the owners had 
hidden from us in the cane itself. As we marched up the valley 
the Spaniards marched along the hills, and observed our 
motion. From the tops of the hills they often tumbled down 
great stones upon us, but with great care we endeavoured 
to escape those dangers, and the report of our gun would 
suddenly cause them all to hide their heads. From this 
house, I mean the sugar-works above-mentioned, Mr Cox, 
myself, and one Cannis, a Dutchman (who was then our 
interpreter), went to the Spaniards with a flag of truce. They 
met us very civilly, and promised to give us four-score beeves 
as ransom of the sugar-work upon condition that it should 
not be spoilt nor demolished. We agreed with them that 
they should be delivered to us at the port next day at noon. 
Hereupon Captain Sharp, in the evening, sent down to the 
port 20 men, with strict orders that our forces there should 
offer no violence to those that brought down the beeves. 

Sunday, October 31st. This day being employed in casting 
up some accounts belonging to our navigation, I reckoned 
that Hilo was to the eastward of Paita one hundred and 
eighty-seven leagues. This morning the Captain of the 
Spaniards came to our Commander, Captain Sharp, with a 
flag of truce, and told him that sixteen beeves were already 
sent down to the port and that the rest should certainly be 
there the next morning. Hereupon we were ordered to prepare 
ourselves to retreat, and march back to the port, and there 
embark ourselves on board our ship. My advice was to the 
contrary, that we should rather leave 20 men behind to 
keep the house of the sugar-works, and that others should 
possess themselves of the hills, thereby to clear them of the 
Spaniards and their look-out. But, my counsel not being 
regarded, each man took away what burden of sugar he 
pleased, and thus we returned to our vessel. Being come 
there, we found no beeves had been brought down at all, 
which occasioned us much to suspect some double-dealing 
would in the latter end be found in this case. 

The next morning, November ist, our Captain went to 
the top of the hills aforementioned, and spoke with the 
Spaniards themselves concerning the performance of their 
agreement. The Spaniards made answer that the cattle 
would certainly come down this night, but, in case they did 



378 THE BUCCANEERS TAKE REVENGE 

not, that the master or owner of the sugar- works had now 
returned from Potosi, and we might go up and treat with 
him, and make, if we pleased, a new bargain for the preserva- 
tion of his house and goods, it being his interest more than 
theirs to save it from being demolished. With this answer 
our men returned to us, and we decided to wait until the 
next day for the delivery of the beeves. 

On the following day, about eight in the morning, there 
came in to us a flag of truce from the enemy, telling us that 
the winds were so high that they could not drive the cattle, 
otherwise they had been delivered before now. But withal 
that by noon we should in no manner fail to have them 
brought to us. Noon being come and no cattle appearing, 
we, now having filled our water and finished other concerns, 
resolved to be revenged on the enemy, and do them what 
mischief we could, at least by setting fire to the sugar-works. 
Hereupon three-score men of us marched up the valley, 
and burnt both the house, the canes, and the mill belonging 
to the ingenio. We broke likewise the coppers, coggs, and 
multitudes of great jars of oil that we found in the house. 
This being done, we brought away more sugar, and returned 
to the port over the hills or mountains, which we found to 
be very pleasant, smooth, and level after once we had ascended 
them. It fell out very fortunately to us that we returned 
back this way, for otherwise our men at the seaside had 
inevitably been cut off and torn in pieces by the enemy, 
they being at that time dispersed and straggling up and down 
in parties of two and three. For from the hills we spied 
coming from the northward of the bay above 300 horsemen, 
all riding at full speed towards our men, who had not as yet 
descried them and little thought of any such danger from 
the enemy so nigh at hand. Being alarmed with this sight, 
we threw down what sugar we had and ran incontinently to 
meet them, thereby to give our other men time to rally and 
put themselves into a posture of defence. We being in good 
rank and order, fairly proffered them battle upon the bay ; 
but, as we advanced to meet them, they retired and rode 
towards the mountains to surround us and take the rocks 
from us, if they possibly could. Hereupon, perceiving their 
intentions, we returned back and possessed ourselves of the 
said rocks, and also of the lower town, as the Spaniards 



THE BUCCANEERS RETIRE 379 

themselves did of the upper town (at the distance of half-a- 
mile from the lower), the hills and the woods adjoining 
thereunto. The horsemen, being now in possession of these 
jquarters, we could perceive as far as we could see more and 
more men resort to them, so that their forces increased 
hourly to considerable numbers. We fired one at another as 
long as we could reach and the day would permit. But in 
the meanwhile we observed that several of them rode to the 
watch-hill, and looked out often to the sea-board. This 
gave us occasion to fear that they had more strength and 
forces coming that way which they expected every minute. 
Hereupon, lest we should speed worse than we had done 
before, we resolved to embark silently in the dark of the 
night, and go off from the coast where we had been so early 
descried and the enemy was so much prepared against us. 
We carried off a great chest of sugar, whereof we shared 
seven-pound- weight-and-a-half each man, thirty jars of oil, 
and great plenty of all sorts of garden herbs, roots, and most 
excellent fruit. 





CHAPTER XIV 

The Buccaneers depart from the Port of Hilo, and sail to that 
of Coquimho. They are descried before their arrival. Not- 
withstanding they land ; are encountered by the Spaniards ; 
and put them to flight. They take, plunder, and flre the City 
of La Serena. A description thereof. A stratagem of the 
Spaniards, in endeavouring to fire their ship, discovered and 
prevented. They are deceived again by the Spaniards, and 
forced to retire from Coquimbo without any ransom for the 
City or considerable pillage. They release several of their 
chief prisoners 

The next morning, being Wednesday, November 3rd, 1679, 
about seven o'clock, we set sail from Hilo, standing directly 
off to sea, with a small land-wind. Upon the shore we could 
not discover this morning above 50 men of our enemies' 
forces, which caused us to suspect the rest were run away 
from their colours and had deserted in the dark of the night. 
If this were so, we were equally afraid of each other, and, 
as we quitted the land being jealous of their multitudes, so 
they abandoned their stations for fear of our encounters. 
All the while we lay in the Port of Hilo, we had a fresh wind, 
but now, being come out thence, we found it was almost 
stark calm. Hereabouts runs a great sea all along this coast, 
as we experimented at Arica, insomuch that there is no 
landing except under the favour of some rock or other. 

November 4th, in the morning, we saw the Port of Hilo 
at E.N.E., at the distance of 9 leagues, more or less, from 
the land. The white sand gives a bright reflection over the 
land, which we could see after we had lost sight of the land 
itself. 

The next day to this we had an indifferent fresh wind at 
S.S.E. We reckoned a S.W. half W. way, and, by it, that 

380 



DEPARTURE FROM HILO 381 

we had made 20 leagues. Tlie day was very fair and sun- 
shiny and the sea very smooth. 

November 6th. We had a clear night the last past, and 
the day proved very fair and clear, like the former. We 
reckoned by a S.W. by W. way about 21 leagues. In the 
afternoon it was almost stark calm. 

On the following day we had in Uke manner very little 
wind, no more than the last twenty-four hours. We were 
now about this time many of us very much troubled and 
diseased with the scurvy. It proceeded, as we judged, from 
the great hardship and want of provisions which we had 
endured for several months past, as having had only bread 
and water, as was mentioned above. Only at Hilo we killed 
a mule, which gave to those who would eat of the flesh a 
very good meal, as we esteemed it, the Spaniards having 
swept away with them all other provisions of flesh. But 
there we had plundered some small quantity of good choco- 
late, whereof the Spaniards make infinite use. So that now 
we had each morning a dish of that pleasant Uquor, containing 
almost a pint. 

Next day likewise we had very little wind, as before. We 
made an observation this day, and found lat. 20° 05' S. 

November 9th we had still very little wind, and that 
variable. We took almost every hour an observation, and 
found ourselves to be in lat. 20° 18' S. 

The loth we had in Uke manner but little wind, as for so 
many days before. We observed an E.S.E. current, or nearest 
to it, to run hereabouts. This day we saw the homing of a 
very high land, which we much admired, for at this time 
I conceived we could not be less than 35 or 40 leagues distant 
from land. We supposed it to be Mora Tarapaca. That 
day we set up our shrouds. 

Upon the nth an indifferent gale of wind sprang up at 
S.W. by S., by which we made twenty-five leagues and one- 
third. We had now a great S.S.W. sea. In the night the 
wind we found came one or two points from the land. This 
morning we saw the like homing of land, whereby we were 
made sensible that it was no land which we had seen the day 
before. 

On the i2th we had several mists of rain, with windy 
weather. We made by a S.S.W. half S. way, 25 leagues and 



382 DEPARTURE FROM HILO 

one-third. We had likewise a great and roUing S.S.W. sea, 
as the day before. 

The 13th of the said month we had both cloudy and misty 
weather. We made a S.S.W. and one-quarter S. way, by 
which we ran 50 leagues. 

But the next day fair and clear weather came about again. 
We had likewise an easy gale of wind, by which we made 
a S.W. way and advanced 22 leagues and-a-half. 

On November 15th, we had also clear weather and an 
indifferent gale of wind. Our way was S.W. by W., by 
which we reckoned 18 leagues. Likewise that our westing 
from Hilo, whence we had set forth, was 114 leagues and 
one-third. By observation we found lat. 23° 25'. I took 
now the decHnation-table used and made by the cosmographer 
of Lima. 

Tuesday, November i6th. Last night we had a shower 
or two of rain. By observation we found lat. 23° 35' S. 

The 17th we made a S.W. by W. half S. way. By 
observation we found lat. 23° 46' S. with very little 
wind. 

The i8th upon a S.W. by W. way we made 21 leagues. 
By observation we found lat. 24° 20' S. 

Friday, November 19th, 1680. This morning about an 
hour before day we observed a comet to appear a degree N. 
from the bright in Libra. The body thereof seemed dull, 
and its tail extended itself 18 or 20 degrees in length, being 
of a pale colour and pointing directly N.N.W. Our prisoners 
hereupon reported to us that the Spaniards had seen very 
strange sights, both at Lima, the capital city of Peru, Guaya- 
quil, and other places, much about the time of our coming 
into the South Seas. I reckoned this day we had run 20 
leagues by a S.W. way. 

The day following the appearance of the comet we had 
many storms of wind at S.S.E. and E.S.E. Our reckoning 
by a S.W. by W. way was 22 leagues. 

Sunday, November 21st, we had likewise many gusts of 
wind, such as the day before, with frequent showers of rain. 
The wind varied to and fro, according as the clouds drew 
it here and there. We reckoned a S.S.W. way, and, by it, 21 
leagues and a-half. In all, W. from Hilo, we judged ourselves 
to be 178 leagues and two-thirds. We had this day a great 



DEPARTURE FROM HILO 383 

S.W. Sea, and cloudy weather. I supposed our latitude to 
be 26° 53' S. 

November 22nd we had in like manner cloudy weather, 
and now but little wind. We reckoned a S. way, and 51 
leagues. 

The 23rd we had very little wind, all the storm after the 
appearance of the comet being now quite allayed. We 
reckoned we had made a S.E. by E. way. By observation 
found lat. 27° 46' S. 

Wednesday, November 24th. All the last twenty-four 
hours we had a N.W. wind. Our way was S.E. half S., by 
which we reckoned 31 leagues and one-third. 

The 25th. Last night the wind blew at W.S.W., but this 
morning it came about again at N.W. as the day before. 
Our reckoning this day was a S.E. and one-quarter E. way, 
29 leagues and one- third. Lat., by observation 39° 57' S. 
Our difference of meridian 135J. 

November 26th. In the night the wind started to S.S.W., 
but this day at noon we had little better than a calm. I 
reckoned an E.S.E. half E. way, and, by it, 23 leagues. 

Saturday, 27th. Yesterday in the evening the wind came 
to S. I reckoned an E. and something S. way, and, by that, 
23 leagues, as the day before this. 

November 28th. All the last twenty-four hours we enjoyed 
a fresh wind at S.S.E., having a high S.W. sea. Our reckoning 
was an E. by N. and half N. way, and withal 24 leagues. 
By observation lat. 30° 16' S. and meridian distance 88 
leagues. At noon the wind came at S. half E. 

On the 29th we had a very great S.W. sea, and withal 
cloudy weather. My reckoning was by an E. one-third S. 
way, 20 leagues and one-third. This day we happened to 
see two or three great fowls flying in the air, concerning 
which our pilot told us that tliey used to appear 70 or 80 
leagues off from the island called Juan Fernandez. The 
day before this Captain Peralta, our prisoner, was taken very 
frantic, his distemper being occasioned, as we thought, 
through too much hardship and melancholy. Notwith- 
standing, this present day he became indifferent^ well again. 

The following day we had hkewise cloudy weather. We 
made, according to our account, an E. half N. way, and by 
* See note on p. 87. 



384 LA CIUDAD DE LA SERENA 

it 16 leagues and two-thirds. Our meridian difference 52 
leagues, 

December ist. We had hazy weather, and withal an 
indifferent good wind at S., yea, sometimes S. by W. Our 
way was E. by S., by which we reckoned 22 leagues. The 
night before this day we sailed over white water like banks, 
of a mile in length or more. But these banks, upon examina- 
tion, we found to be only great shoals of anchovies. 

On December 2nd, very early in the morning, we espied 
land, which appeared to be very high. About noon this 
day we were 6 leagues distance from it. All the preceding 
night we had so much wind that we were forced to make 
use only of a pair of courses. By an observation made this 
day, we found lat. 30° 35' S. We went away largely, driving 
better than nine leagues every watch. With this wind we 
made all the sail we possibly could, designing by this means 
to get into Coquimbo, upon which coast we now were, before 
night. But the wind was so high that sometimes we were 
forced to lower all our sail, it blowing now a mere fret of wind. 
Towards the evening it abated by degrees, insomuch that 
at midnight it was stark calm again. At that time we hoisted 
out our launch and canoes, and, putting into them 100 men, 
we rowed away from the ship with design to take by surprisal 
a considerable city, situated nigh unto the coast, called by 
the Spaniards La Ciudad de la Serena. 

Friday, December 3rd, 1679. When we departed from the 
ship, we had above 2 leagues, more or less, to row to the 
shore. But, as it happened, the launch (wherein I was) 
rowed so heavily in comparison to the canoes that we could 
not keep pace with the said boats. For this reason and no 
other, it was broad day before we got to a certain storehouse 
situated upon the shore, which we found our men had passed 
by in the dark of the night, without perceiving it. They, 
being landed, immediately marched away from their canoes 
towards the city aforementioned of La Serena, but they had 
not proceeded far on their march when they found, to the 
great sorrow and chagrin of us all, that we were discovered 
here also, as we had been at the other two places before, to 
wit Arica and Hilo. For, as they marched in a body together 
being but thirty-five men in all, who were all those that were 
landed out of the canoes, they were suddenly encountered 



CAPTURE OF LA SERENA 385 

and engaged by a whole troop of an hundred Spanisli horse. 
We that were behind, hearing the noise of the dispute, 
followed them at their heels, and made all the haste we 
possibly could to come up to their relief. But, before we 
could reach the place of battle, they had already routed the 
Spaniards and forced them to fly away towards the town. 

Notwithstanding this rout given to the horse, they rallied 
again at a distance of about a mile from that place, and 
seemed as if they did wait for us and would engage us anew. 
But, as soon as all our forces were come together, whereof 
we could make but fourscore-and-eight men in all, the rest 
being left behind to guard the boats, we marched towards 
them and offered them battle. As we came nigh unto them, 
we clearly found they designed no such thing, for they in- 
stantly retired and rode away before us, keeping out of the 
reach of our guns. We followed them as they rode, being led 
by them designedly clear out of the road that went to the 
town, that we might not reach nor find it so soon. In this 
engagement with the horse our company had killed three of 
their chief men and wounded four more, killing also four of 
their horses. When we found that we had been led by this 
stratagem of the enemy out of the way of the town, we left 
the bay and crossed over the green fields to find it, wading 
oftentimes over several branches of water, which there serve 
to enclose each plot of ground. Upon this march we came 
to several houses, but found them all empty and swept clean 
both of inhabitants and provisions. We saw likewise several 
horses and other heads of cattle in the fields, as we went 
along towards the City. This place of La Serena our pilot 
had reported to us to be but a small town, but, being arrived 
there, we found in it no fewer than seven great churches 
and one chapel belonging thereto. Four of these churches 
were monasteries or convents, and each church had its organ 
for the performance of divine service. Several of the houses 
had their orchards of fruit and gardens belonging to them, 
both houses and gardens being as well and as neatly furnished 
as those in England. In these gardens we found strawberries 
as big as wahiuts and very delicious to the taste. In a word, 
everything in this city of La Serena was most excellent and 
delicate, and far beyond what we could expect in so remote 
a place. The town Was inhabited by all sorts of tradesmen, 
2 c 



386 



LA SERENA 



and besides them had its merchants, some of which were 
accounted to be very rich. 

The inhabitants of La Serena, upon our approach and 
discovery, were all fled, carrying with them whatever was 
most precious of their goods and jewels, or less cumbersome 
to them. Much of their valuable things they had likewise 
concealed or buried, having had time since we were first 
discovered so to do. Besides, they had had warning enough 
to beware of us, sent them over land from Arica and several 
other places where we had landed or been descried at sea. 
Notwithstanding, we took in the town one friar and two 








[fel 













} ^' Fran au 

JO ScrivetterT houje 
JJ Jia^l^U j>Uce 
J2, -XcffiinJI 


•naSiE. 












^ 










/«|- 


Wii 


fe 




^ 








.Hi 




9 








}^ 










^ 


t' 


^ 


jj TAc Cttty of fa jS'ereJW ^/ti^tue/e 30 


({. 00. Sovt^ . 



Chilenos, or Spaniards, natives of the Kingdom of Chile, 
which adjoins that of Peru, towards the Strait of Magellan. 
These prisoners related to us that the Spaniards, when they 
heard of our coming, had killed most of the Chihan slaves, 
fearing lest they should run or revolt from them to us. More- 
over, that we had been descried from their coasts four days 
before our arrival or descent upon land — all which time 
they had employed in carrying away their plate and goods. 
To this information they added that for their defence they 
had received a supply of 60 men from Arica. Having taken 
possession of the town, that evening there came a negro to 
us, running away from the Spaniards. He likewise informed 
\is that, when we were before Panama, we had taken a negro 
who was esteemed to be the best pilot in all the South Sea, 



COQUIMBO 387 

but more especially for this place and all the coasts of Coquim- 
bo. Moreover, that if the Spaniards had not sent all the 
negroes belonging to this city farther up into the country 
out of our reach and communication, they would all un- 
doubtedly have revolted to us. 

That night about midnight our boatswain, accompanied 
by 40 men and having a Chilian for their guide, went out of 
the town some miles within the country, with design to find 
out the places where the Spaniards lay concealed, and had hid 
their goods and plate. But, before they came, the Spaniards 
had received intelligence thereof from some secret spies they 
had in the town, and both the men and their women were all 
fled to places that were more occult and remote. So that by 
this search they only found an old Indian woman and three 
children, but no gold nor plate, nor yet any other prisoners. 
This morning our ship came to an anchor, by the storehouse 
above-mentioned, named Tortuga, at the distance of a furlong 
from shore, in seven fathom water. While we were quartered 
in the town, I took this following ground-plate thereof. 

The next morning, being Saturday, December 4th, there 
came into the town a flag of truce from the enemy. Their 
message was to proffer a ransom for the town to preserve it 
from burning, for now they began to fear we would set fire 
to it, as having found no considerable booty or pillage therein. 
The Captains, or chief Commanders, of both sides met about 
this point, and agreed betwixt them for the sum of 95,000 
pieces-of-eight to be the price of the whole ransom. In the 
afternoon of this day I was sent down to the bay of Coquimbo, 
with a party of 20 men, to carry thither both goods taken in 
the town and provisions for the ship. It is two-leagues-and-a- 
half from the town to the port — one league on the bay, the 
rest being a very great road, which leads from the bay to the 
city. The Spaniards promised that the ransom should be 
collected and paid in by the next day. This day also there 
died one of our negro slaves on board the ship. 

The following day in the morning I returned back to the 
town with the men I had brought down the day before. Only 
six of them I left behind, to look after our canoes at the end 
of the bay. When I came up into the city, I found that the 
Spaniards had broken their promise, and had not brought 
in the ransom they had agreed for ; but had begged more 



388 A SPANISH STRATAGEM 

time until to-morrow at eight in the forenoon. This evening 
another party of our men went down to the ship, to carry 
goods, such as we had pillaged in the town. Moreover, that 
night about nine o'clock happened an earthquake, which we 
were very sensible of, as we were all together in the church 
of San Juan, where our chief rendezvous and corps du garde 
was kept. In the night the Spaniards opened a sluice, and 
let the water run in streams about the town, with intent 
either to overflow it and thereby force us out of the place, 
or at least that they might the easier quench the flame, in 
case we should fire the town. 

On the next morning we set fire to the town, perceiving 
it to be overflowed and that the Spaniards had not performed, 
or rather that they never designed to perform their promise. 
We fired, as nigh as we could, every house in the whole town, 
to the intent it might be totally reduced to ashes. Thus we 
departed from La Serena, carrying with us what plunder 
we could find, having sent two parties before, loaded with 
goods to the ship, as was mentioned above. As we marched 
down to the bay, we beat up an ambuscade of 250 horse, 
which lay by the way in private, with an intent to fall on our 
men, in case we had sent down any other party again with 
goods to the ship. When we came to the sea-side, being 
half-way to our ship, we received advice that the Spaniards 
had endeavoured, by an unusual stratagem, to burn our 
ship and by these means destroy us all. They acted thus : 
They blew up a horse's hide Hke a bladder, and upon this 
float a man ventured to swim from shore and come under 
the stern of our ship. Being arrived there, he crammed 
oakum and brimstone, and other combustible matter, between 
the rudder and the stern-post. Having done this, he fired 
it with a match, so that in a small time our rudder was on 
fire and all the ship in a smoke. Our men both alarmed and 
amazed with this smoke, ran up and down the ship, suspecting 
the prisoners to have fired the vessel, thereby to get their 
liberty and seek our destruction. At last they found out 
where the fire was, and had the good fortune to quench it 
before its going too far. As soon as they had put it out, 
they sent the boat ashore, and found both the hide afore- 
mentioned and the match burning at both ends, whereby 
they became acquainted with the whole matter. When 



RELEASE OF THEIR PRISONERS 389 

we came to the storehouse on the shore-side, we set at Hberty 
the friar, our prisoner, and another gentleman who was 
become our hostage for the performance of the ransom. 
Moreover, when we came aboard, we sent away and set at 
Hberty Captain Peralta, Don Thomas de Argandona, Don 
Baltazar, Don Christoval, Captain Juan, the Pilot's Mate, 
the old Moor, and several others of our chief prisoners. To 
this release of our prisoners we were moved partly because 
we knew not well what to do with them, and partly because 
we feared lest by the example of this stratagem they should 
plot our destruction in earnest, and by the help of so many 
men, especially persons of quality, be able to go through 
with it. 



CHAPTER XV 

The Buccaneers depart from Coquimho for the isle of Juan 
Fernandez. An exact account of this voyage. Misery they 
endure, and great dangers they escape very narrowly there. 
They mutiny among themselves, and choose Waiting to he 
their chief commander. Description of the island. Three 
Spanish men-of-war meet with the Buccaneers at the said 
island, but these outbrave them on the one side and give 
them the slip on the other 

Being all embarked again, as was mentioned in the preceding 
chapter, the next morning, which was Tuesday, December 7th, 
twenty of us were sent ashore to observe the motion of the 
enemy. We went to the look-out, or watch-hill, but could 
learn nothing thence. Hereupon about noon we returned 
on board the ship, and at two in the afternoon we weighed 
anchor and set sail, directing our course for the isle of Juan 
Fernandez, not far distant from the coast of Coquimbo. At 
night we were five leagues distant thence at N.W. by N. 




DEPARTURE FROM COQUIMBO 391 

The southermost island of those, which are called De los 
Paxaros, or the Islands of Birds, was then N.N.W. from us. 
Before our departure I took this draft of the bay of Coquimbo 
and city of La Serena. 

December 8th we had but very little wind and a lee-ward 
current here, which we perceived did heave us to the North- 
ward. The aforementioned island, De los Paxaros, at three 
in the afternoon bore N.E. of us. At the distance of 3 leagues, 
more or less, it appeared thus : — 




Isle de los Paxaros 

It is distant from the main continent four leagues, and from 
the next island of the same name about two. The mainland is 
extremely high and mountainous hereabouts. At evening 
we were west from the said island five leagues. About 8 
or 9 leagues to windward of Coquimbo are certain white 
cUffs which appear from the shore to those that are off at 
sea. 

On December 9th we had likewise but little wind, as the 
day before. I supposed myself this day to be about thirteen 
leagues W. from the island above-mentioned. The weather 
was cloudy, with mizzling rain, so that no observation could 
be taken. However, this day it was thought convenient to 
put us to an allowance of water, for we had taken in little 
or none at Coquimbo. The same weather, or very like it, we 
had the next day, being the 10 th — that is to say, stark calm 
and cloudy. 

On December nth we had some small rain in the forepart 
of the day. But in the afternoon it cleared up, so that the 
weather was very hot. We had still but httle wind. 

The next day, December 12th, we had very fair weather, 
and by a clear observation made this day we found lat. 
30° 06' S. 



392 DEPARTURE FROM COQUIMBO 

December 13th. By a W.S.W. way we made forty-two 
leagues. By observation we found lat. 30° 45' S. D.M. 4 
leagues and two-thirds. 

On the 14th, in the morning, we had a handsome shower 
of rain, which continued for some while. Then, about eight 
o'clock, there sprang up a S.S.W. breeze. My reckoning was 
by an E.S.E. way 14 leagues. And by observation we found 
this day 30° 30' S. In the afternoon of this day died one of 
our men whose name was William Cammock. His disease 
was occasioned by a surfeit, gained by too much drinking on 
shore at La Serena, which produced in him a calenture, or 
malignant fever, and a hiccough. Thus in the evening we 
buried him in the sea, according to the usual custom of 
mariners, giving him three French volleys for his funeral. 

The following day we had an indifferent fresh wind on both 
tacks. Our way was W.S.W., and by it we reckoned 34 
leagues. So likewise by an observation we had lat. 30° 42' S. 
All the afternoon blew a S. by W. wind very fresh, with 
a short topping S.W. sea. 

But on the next ensuing day we had no small breeze, but 
rather hard gusts of wind. These grew so high that they 
forced us to take in our top-sails. We made a S.W. half S. 
way, and 45 leagues. 

On the 17th we had likewise high winds, and withal a S.W. 
sea. Our way W. by S. By observation this day lat. 30° 51' S. 
In the afternoon we had a S.S.E. wind, our course being S.W. 

December i8th. This day we had the same high winds 
as before, at S.S.E. We reckoned by a W.S.W. way forty-five 
leagues. At noon the wind was somewhat fallen, and then 
we had some rain. 

The 19th we had both cloudy and windy weather. My 
reckoning was a S.W. by S. way, and hereupon fifty-eight 
miles. Yesterday we were assured by our pilot that we 
were now in the meridian of the island of Juan Fernandez, 
whither our course was directed for the present. What 
occasioned him to be so positive in his assertion was the 
seeing of those great birds of which we made mention in the 
foregoing chapter. 

On the 20 th we had cloudy weather in the morning on both 
tacks. We made a S.W. and half S. way, and by it 52 leagues. 
By observation this day lat. 32° 20' S. D.M. 123 leagues. 



ISLAND OF JUAN FERNANDEZ 393 

The next day likewise we had cloudy weather, yet by 
observation we found a W. way. On the 22nd by observation 
we found an E. way proved. 

Thursday, December 23rd. All the night past we had a 
fresh wind. But, in the morning from top-mast head we 
descried a hummock of land. In the evening we saw it again. 
We found afterwards that what we had seen was the Western- 
most island of Juan Fernandez — which is nothing but a mere 
rock, there being no riding, nor scarce landing, near to it. 

Friday, December 24th. This morning we could descry 
the island of Juan Fernandez itself S. by E., it being at 
sixteen leagues distance when we saw it yesterday. At 
.^even this morning the island stood E., the wind being N.W. 
or by N. At eight the same morning the island at the distance 
of five leagues, little more or less, appeared thus : — 




Isle de Juan Fernandez 

Here my observation was that I could see neither fowl 
nor fish near this island ; both which things are usually to 
be seen about other islands. Having told my observation 
to our pilot, he gave me for answer that he had made many 
voyages by this island and yet never saw either fowl or fish 
any more than I. Our reckoning this day was an E.S.E. way, 
and hereby 36 leagues. By observation lat. 33° 30' S. 

Saturday, December 25th. Yesterday, in the afternoon 
at three o'clock, we saw the other island making two or three 
hummocks of land. This morning we were about eight leagues 
distant from it, the island bearing E.S.E. from us. At eight 
the same morning we were right abreast with it. Here, 
therefore, are two islands together, the biggest whereof is 
3 leagues and a-half in length nearest N.W. and S.E., the 
other (and lesser) is almost one league and no more in circum- 
ference. At ten o'clock we sent off from the ship one of our 
canoes to seek for the best landing and anchoring for our 



394 ISLAND OF JUAN FERNANDEZ 

vessel. As we approached, both islands seemed to us nothing 
but one entire heap of rocks. That which Hes more to the 
N. is the highest, though we could not now see the tops 
thereof for the clouds which covered it. In most places it 
is so steep that it becomes almost perpendicular. 

This day being Christmas-day, we gave in the morning 
early three volleys of shot for solemnization of that great 
festival. I reckoned an E. by S. way. By a clear observation 
from the middle of the island lat. 33° 45' S., and M.D. 99 
leagues. In the evening of this day we came to an anchor at 
the South end of the island in a stately bay that we found 
there, but which lies open from the S. to the S.E. winds. 
We anchored in eleven fathom water, and at the distance 
of only one furlong from the shore. Here we saw multitudes 
of seals covering the bay everywhere, insomuch that we 
were forced to kill them to set our feet on shore. 

Sunday, December 26th. This day we sent a canoe to see 
if we could find any riding secure from the southerly winds, 
these being the most constant winds that blow on these 
coasts. The canoe being gone, our Commander sent likewise 
what men we could spare on shore, to drive goats, whereof 
there is great plenty in this island. They caught and killed 
that day to the number of three-score or thereabouts. The 
canoe, returning to the ship, made report that there was 
good riding in another bay, situate on the North side of 
the island, in fourteen fathom water and not above one- 
quarter-of-a-mile from the shore. Moreover, that there was 
much wood to be had, whereas in the place where we had 
first anchored not one stick of wood nor tuft of grass was to 
be found. 

The next day, being the 27th, between two and four o'clock 
in the morning we had a tempest of violent winds and fierce 
showers of rain. The same day we got in two-hundred jars 
of water, bringing them the full distance of a league from 
the place of our riding. In the meanwhile others were 
employed to catch goats, as they had done the day 
before. 

On the 28th of the said month, in the morning, I went 
with ten more of our company and two canoes, to fetch water 
from the land. Being come thither and having filled our 
jars, we could not get back to the ship by reason of a Southerly 



WILD-GOATS; A TEMPEST 395 

wind that blew from off the ocean and hindered our return. 
Thus we were forced to lie still in a water-hole, and wait 
till the winds were over for a safer opportunity. Meanwhile, 
the violence of the wind increasing, our ship was forced to 
get under sail and make away, not without danger of being 
forced ashore. Hereupon she sailed out of the harbour, 
to seek another place of anchoring. At noon I ventured out, 
to try if I could follow the ship, but was forced in again by 
the wind and a raging sea. Thus we lay still for some while 
longer till the evening came on. This being come, we ven- 
tured out again both canoes together, but the winds were 
then so high that we were forced to throw all our jars of water 
overboard to lighten our boats — otherwise we had inevitably 
perished. I ought to bless and praise God Almighty for this 
dehverance, for, in all human reason, the least wave of that 
tempest must have sunk us. Notwithstanding, we came 
that night to our place, or harbour, where we expected to 
have found our ship (called False Wild Harbour) — but found 
her not. Hereupon, not knowing what to do, we went ashore, 
and hauled up our canoes dry. Having done this, we ascended 
higher within the island, along a guUey, for the space of 
half-a-mile, there to clear ourselves of the noise and company 
of the seals, which were very troublesome on the shore. Here 
we kindled a fire, dried our clothes, and rested ourselves all 
night, though with extremely hungry bellies, having eaten 
very little or nothing all the day before. In the sides of the 
hill under which we lay we observed many holes like coney- 
holes. These holes are the nests and roosting-places of 
multitudes of birds that breed in this island — called by the 
Spaniards pardelas. One of these birds, as we lay drying 
and warming ourselves, fell down into our fire. 

The next morning being come, very early before sunrise 
we went farther to the northward, to seek for our ship, which 
we feared we had lost. But we were not gone far when we 
soon spied her at sea. Hereupon we passed a point of land 
and entered a certain bay, which was about a mile deep and 
not above half-a-league over. Into this bay we put, and 
instantly made a fire, thereby to show the ship whereabouts 
we were. Here we found good watering and wooding close 
to the shore. In this bay also we saw another sort of amphibi- 
ous animal, which" I imagined to be the same that by some 



396 SEALS; PARDELAS ; SEA-LIONS 

authors is called a ' Sea-Lion '^. These animals are six times 
bigger than seals. Their heads are like that of a Hon, and 
they have four fins not unlike a tortoise. The hinder parts 
of these creatures are much like fins, but are drawn after 
them, being useless upon the shore. They roared as if they 
had been lions, and were full of a certain short and thick 
hair, which was of a mouse colour, but that of the young 
ones was somewhat lighter. The old ones of these sea-lions 
are between 12 and 14 feet long and about 11 or 12 feet in 
circumference. A seal is very easily killed, as we often 
experimented, but two of our men with great stones could 
not kill one of these animals. 

That day in the afternoon there came a canoe from on board 
the ship with provisions for us, they fearing lest we should 
be starved. In like manner the launch came with men to 
cut wood. They told us that the ship came to an anchor 
in the other bay, but that within half an hour the cable 
broke, and they were forced to leave their anchor behind 
them and get out to sea again. Night being come, we made 
our beds of fern, whereof there is huge plenty upon this 
island, together with great multitudes of trees like our English 
box, which bear a sort of green berries, smelling like pimento, 
or pepper. All this day the ship was forced to ply off at sea, 
not being able to get in. 

December 30 th. The morning of this day we employed 
in fining water and cutting down wood. But in the afternoon 
eight of us eleven went aboard the ship all in one and the same 
canoe, sending her ashore again with provisions for the men 
that were there. This day in like manner we could not get 
into the harbour, for no sooner the ship came within the 
parts of land but the wind coming out of the bay blew us 
clear out again. Thus we were forced to ply out all that 
night and great part of the following day. 

On the next day, having overcome all difficulties and 
many dangers, we came to an anchor in the afternoon in 
fifteen fathom water, at the distance of a cable's length from 
shore. Here it was observable that we were forced to keep 

1 Probably the seal, Otaria jubata, of the Pacific Ocean, which has a 
large crest or mane, on its neck. Cf. Dampier, Voyages (1697), ed. 1729, 
i, 90 : " The Sea Lion is a large creature about 12 or 14 foot long." It 
must not be confused with the walrus, as is frequently done. 



WINDY WEATHER 397 

men ashore on purpose to beat off the seals, while our men 
filled water at the sea-side, at high-water mark, for the 
seals covet hugely to lie in fresh water. About this island 
fish is so plentiful that in less than one hour's time two men 
caught enough for our whole company. 

Saturday, January ist, 1681. This day we put up a new 
main-top, larger than the old one, and we caught cray-fish 
that were bigger than our English lobsters. 

The next day, being January 2nd, died a chief man of 
our company, whose name was John Milliard. This man, 
until our weighing anchor from the port of Coquimbo, had 
been our Master all the space of this voyage. But from that 
time we chose John Cox for the starboard, and John Fall 
for the larboard, watch. The disease whereof he died was 
the dropsy. That evening we buried our dead companion, 
and gave him a volley for his funeral, according to the usual 
custom. 

On January 3rd we had terrible gusts of wind from the 
shore every hour. This day our pilot told us that many years 
ago a certain ship was cast away upon this island, and only 
one man saved, who lived alone upon the island five years 
before any ship came this way to carry him off. The island 
has excellent land in many valleys belonging thereunto. 
This day, likewise, we fetched our anchor which we left in 
the other bay when the ship broke her cable. 

Tuesday, January 4th, 1681. This day we had such terrible 
flaws of wind that the cable of our ship broke, and we had 
undoubtedly been on shore had not the other held us fast. 
At last it came home, and we drove outward. By the way it 
caught hold of a rock, and held some time, but at last we 
hauled it up, and the wind came with so much violence that 
the waves flew as high as our main-top and made all the 
water of a foam. 

January 5th the same huge gusts of wind continued all the 
night last past, notwithstanding which this day at noon it 
was brave and calm. But in the morning the anchor of 
our ship gave way again, and we drove to the Eastward more 
than half-a-mile, till at last we happened to fasten again in 
60 fathom water. Here in this bay where we rode at anchor 
did run a violent current, sometimes into and at other times 
out of the bay, so that all was uncertain with us. But our 



398 MUTINY AMONG THE BUCCANEERS 

greatest discomfort was that our men were all in a mutiny 
against each other, and much divided among themselves, 
some of them being for going home towards England or our 
foreign plantations, and that round about America through 
the Strait of Magellan, as Captain Sawkins had designed 
to do ; others of them being for staying longer and searching 
farther into those seas till such time as they had got more 
money. This day at noon our anchor drove again, whereupon, 
to secure ourselves from that dangerous place, we sailed 
thence into the West bay, anchored there in twenty-five 
fathom water, and moored our ship one-quarter-of-a-mile 
from shore. 

On Thursday, January 6th, our differences being now 
grown to a great height, the mutineers made a new election 
of another person to be our chief Captain and Commander, 
by virtue whereof they deposed Captain Sharp, whom they 
protested they would obey no longer. They chose therefore 
one of our company whose name was John WatUng, to 
command in chief, he having been an old privateer and 
gained the esteem of being a stout seaman. The election 
being made, all the rest were forced to give their assent to 
it, and Captain Sharp gave over his command, whereupon 
they immediately made articles with Watling, and signed 
them. 

The following day, being the 7th, we burnt and tallowed 
the starboard side of our ship. In this bay where we now 
anchored we found a cross cut in the bark of a tree and several 
letters besides. Hereupon, in another tree up the guUey, 
I engraved the two first letters of my name, with a cross over 
them. This day, likewise, William Cook, servant to Captain 
Edmund Cook, being searched, we found a paper with all our 
names written in it, which it was suspected he designed to 
have given to the Spanish prisoners. For these reasons this 
evening our Captain thought it convenient to put him in irons, 
which was accordingly done. The next day we finished the 
other side of our ship. 

Sunday, January 9th. This day was the first Sunday 
that ever we kept by command and common consent since 
the loss and death of our valiant commander, Captain Saw- 
kins. This generous-spirited man threw the dice overboard, 
finding them in use on the said day. 



SPANISH MEN-OF-WAR 399 

January 10 th. This day the weather was very clear and 
settled again. We caught every day in the bay where we now 
were great plenty of fish, and I saw the same day a shoal 
of fish a mile and more long. 

On the next day, being the nth, we filled our water and 
carried our wood on board the ship. Moreover, our two 
canoes went to the other side of the island to catch goats, 
for on the barren side thereof are found and caught the best, 
and by land it is impossible to go from one side of the island 
to the other. 

Wednesday, January 12th. This morning our canoes 
returned from catching goats, firing guns as they came 
towards us to give us warning. Being come on board, they 
told us they had espied three sail of ships, which they con- 
ceived to be men-of-war, coming about the island. Within 
half-an-hour after this notice given by our boats, the ships 
came in sight to leeward of the island. Hereupon we immedi- 
ately slipped our cables and put to sea, taking all our men 
on board that were ashore at that time. Only one, William, 
a Mosquito Indian, was then left behind on the island, because 
he could not be found at this our sudden departure. Upon 
the Island of Juan Fernandez grow certain trees that are 
called by the name of bilby-trees. The tops of these trees 
are excellent cabbage, and of them is made the same use 
that we do of cabbage in England. Here fish abound in such 
quantity that on the surface of the water I have taken fish 
with a bare and naked hook, that is to say unbaited. Much 
fish is taken here of the weight of twenty pounds, the smallest 
that is taken in the bay being almost two pound weight. 
Very good timber for building of houses and other uses is 
hkewise found upon the island. It is distant from the main 
continent ninety-five leagues or thereabouts, being situate 
in 33° 40' S.. The plats of the island lie N.W. and S.E. 

Being got out of the bay, we stood off to sea, and kept 
to windward as close as we could. The biggest of these 
Spanish men-of-war, for such they proved to be, was of the 
burden of 800 tons, and was called El Santo Christo, being 
mounted with twelve guns. The second, named San Francisco, 
was of the port of 600 tons, and had ten guns. The third 
was of the carriage of 350 tons, whose name I have forgotten. 
As soon as they saw us, they instantly put out their bloody 



400 ISLAND OF JUAN FERNANDEZ 

flags, and we, to show them that we were not as yet daunted, 
did the same with ours. We kept close under the wind, and 
were, to confess the truth, very unwilUng to fight them, by 
reason they kept all in a knot together and we could not 
single out any one of them or separate him from the rest — 
especially considering that our present Commander, Watling, 
had showed himself at their appearance to be faint-hearted. 
As for the Spaniards themselves, they might have easily come 
to us, since we lay by several times, but undoubtedly they 
were cowardly given, and peradventure as unwilling to engage 
us as we were to engage them. 

The following day, being January 13th, in the morning 
we could descry one of the forementioned men-of-war under 
the leeward side of the island, and we beheved that the rest 
were at anchor thereabouts. At W. by S. and at the distance 
of seven leagues the island appeared thus : — 




Isle of Juan Fernandez 



LAT. 33'' 40' S. 



At noon that day we stood towards the island, making as 
if that we intended to be in with them. But in the afternoon 
our Commander propounded the question to us whether 
we were wiUing now that the fleet was to windward, to bear 
away from them. To this we all agreed with one consent. 
And hereupon, night being come, with a fresh wind at S.S.E. 
we stood away N.E. by N., and thus gave them handsomely 
the sUp, after having outbraved them that day and the day 
before. 




CHAPTER XVI 

TAe Buccaneers depart from the isle of Juan Fernandez to thai of 
Iquique. Here they take several prisoners, and learn intelli- 
gence of the posture of affairs at Arica. Cruelty committed 
upon one of the said prisoners who had rightly informed 
them. They attempt Arica the second time, and take the 
town, hut are beaten out of it again before they could plunder — 
with great loss of men, many of them being killed, wounded^ 
and made prisoners. Captain Waiting, their chief Com- 
mander, is killed in this attack, and Captain Sharp presently 
chosen again, who leads them off, and through mountains of 
difficulties makes a bold retreat to the ship 

Having* bid our enemies adieu, after the manner as was said 
in the preceding chapter, the next morning, being January 
14th, we bore N.E. We reckoned this day a N.N.E. one 
quarter S. way, and by it 30 leagues. We were four leagues 
E. from the island of Juan Fernandez, when I took our 
departure. 

Saturday, January 15th, we had hazy weather. This day 
we made by a N.E. by N. way 11 leagues. The same hazy 
weather continued in like manner the i6th. But about ten 



401 



402 DEPART FROM JUAN FERNANDEZ 

that nxorning the wind died away. Our reckoning was a 
N.E. by N. way, and 36 leagues. 

On the 17th we had a soft gale, and a clear observation. 
We found by it lat. 28° 47' S. easting 70 leagues. The next 
day we had likewise a clear day, and we reckoned by a N.E. 
by N. way 31 leagues. By observation lat. 27° 29' S. 

Wednesday, January 19th, we had a clear day, as before, 
and reckoned a N.E. by N. way, and 35 leagues and two- 
thirds. By observation we took lat. 25° 00' S. This day 
we put up our top-gallant masts and sails, which we had 
taken down at the island of Juan Fernandez, when we thought 
to have gone directly thence for the Strait of Magellan. 
But now our resolutions were changed, and our course was 
bent for Arica, that rich place, the second time, to try what 
good we could do upon it by another attempt, in order to 
make all our fortunes there. In the evening of this day we 
saw land at a great distance. 

January 20th, about midnight, we had a small land-wind 
that sprang up and reached us. At break of day we could 
descry land again, at the distance of 9 or 10 leagues, more 
or less. This day was very hot and calm, easting 92 leagues. 

On the 2ist we had very little wind, and all along as we 
went we could descry high land, and that barren. We sailed 
N. by E., and N.N.E. along the coast of the continent. 

The next day being Saturday, January 22nd, we had very 
hot weather. This day we sailed N. and N. by E., and looked 
out continually for the island of Iquique, which our pilot 
told us was hereabouts. We kept at a just distance from land 
for fear of being descried by the enemy. 

On the following day, Sunday, 23rd, we sailed in like 
manner N.N.E. along the coast, which seems to be very full 
of bays hereabouts. By observation this day we took lat. 
21° 49' S. 

Monday, January 24th. This day we had an indifferent 
gale of wind, and we stood N. and by E., the wind being 
S.S.E. By observation lat. 21° 02' S. Our whole easting I 
reckoned to be 92 leagues and a-half. In the afternoon of 
this day Captain Wathng, our Commander, and 25 men 
more departed from the ship in two canoes, with design to 
seek for and take the island of Iquique, and there to gain 
intelligence of the posture of affairs at Arica. We were at 



THE ISLAND OF IQUIQUE 403 

the distance of twelve leagues from shore when they went 
away from the ship. 

The next day by a clear observation lat. 20° 40' S. At 
four in the afternoon this day one of our canoes returned, 
bringing word that they could not find the island, though 
they had searched for it very diligently. At night came the 
other, being brought back by a wrong sign given us by the 
first canoe. This second canoe had landed upon the continent, 
and there found a track, which they followed for some Httle 
space. Here they met a dead whale, with whose bones the 
Spaniards had built a hut, and set up a cross. There lay also 
many pieces of broken jars. They observed likewise that 
hereabouts upon the coast were many bays, good landings, 
and anchoring for ships. That evening, about seven o'clock, 
a fresh gang departed from the ship to seek for the same 
island, while we lay becalmed all night, driving about a league 
to leeward. 

Wednesday, January 26th, we had extremely hot weather. 
This day the Spanish pilot told us that on the continent 
over against us, and at the distance of a very little way 
within the land, are many rich mines of silver, but that the 
Spaniards dared not open them for fear of an invasion from 
some foreign enemy or other. We sailed N., at the distance 
of about 2 leagues from shore. At noon by observation found 
lat. 20° 21' S. At four o'clock we saw a smoke made by our 
men, close by a white cliff, which proved to be the island. 
Hereupon we immediately sent away another canoe with 
more men, to supply them in their attempts. But in the 
meanwhile the first canoe, which had departed the evening 
before this day, came aboard, bringing with them four 
prisoners, two old white men and two Indians. 

The other canoe, which set out last, brought back molasses, 
fish, and two jars of wine. To windward of the said island 
is a small village of eighteen or twenty houses, having a small 
chapel near it built of stone, and for adornment thereof it is 
stuck full of hides or the skins of seals. They found about 
50 people in this hamlet, but the greatest part of them made 
their escape at the arrival of the canoe. To this island fre- 
quently come barks from Arica, which city is not far distant, 
to fetch clay, and they have aheady transported away a 
considerable part thereof. The poor Indians, inhabitants 



404 MURDER OP AN OLD INDIAN 

or natives of this island, are forced to bring all the fresh 
water they use the full distance of eleven leagues, that is 
to say from a river named Camarones, which lies to leeward 
of the island. The barque wherein they used to bring it was 
gone for water when our men landed upon the place. The 
island all over is white, but the bowels thereof are of a reddish 
sort of earth. From the shore is seen here a great path which 
leads over the mountains into the country. The Indians of' 
this island eat much and often a sort of leaves that are of 
a taste much like our bay-leaves in England, insomuch that 
their teeth are dyed a green colour by the continual use of it. 
The inhabitants go stark naked, and are very robust and 
strong people, yet notwithstanding they live more like beasts 
than men. 

Thursday, January 27th. This morning on board the ship 
we examined one of the old men who were taken prisoners 
upon the island the day before. But, finding him in many 
lies, as we thought, concerning Arica, our Commander ordered 
him to be shot to death, which was accordingly done. Our 
old Commander, Captain Sharp, was much troubled in his 
mind and dissatisfied at this cruel and rash proceeding, 
whereupon he opposed it as much as he could. But, seeing 
he could not prevail, he took water and washed his hands, 
saying : Gentlemen, I am clear of the blood of this old man ; 
and I will warrant you a hot day for this piece of cruelty, when- 
ever we come to fight at Arica. These words were found at the 
latter end of this expedition of Arica to contain a true and 
certain prophecy, as shall be related hereafter. 

The other old man, being under examination, informed 
us that the island of Iquique aforementioned belonged to 
the Governor of Arica, who was proprietor thereof ; and 
that he allowed these men a little wine and other necessaries, 
to live upon for their sustenance. That he himself had the 
superintendence of forty or fifty of the governor's slaves, 
who caught fish and dried it for the profit of the said governor, 
and he sold it afterwards to the inland towns, and reaped 
a considerable benefit thereby. That by a letter received 
from Arica eight days ago they understood there was then 
in the harbour of Arica three ships from Chile, and one bark. 
That they had raised there a fortification mounted with 
12 copper guns. But that when we were there before, they 



OTHER OLD INDIAN'S RELATION 405 

had conveyed out of the town to the neighbouring stations 
all their plate, gold, and jewels, burying it there in the ground 
and concealing it after several manners and ways, which, 
whether it were now returned or not, he could not easily 
tell. That there were two great places, the one at ten, the 
other at twenty-five, leagues distance from Arica, at which 
towns lay all their strength and treasure. That the day 
before had passed a post to declare our having been at Coquim- 
bo. That the embargo laid on all vessels going northward 
was now taken off, so that a free passage was allowed them. 
That by land it was impossible to go hence to Arica in less 
than four or five days, forasmuch as they must carry water 
for themselves and horses for the whole journey. And, lastly, 
that those arms that were brought from Lima to Arica, as 
was mentioned above, were now carried away to Buenos 
Ayres. All these things pleased us mighty well to hear. 
But, however. Captain Sharp was still much dissatisfied 
because we had shot the old man. For he had given us 
information to the full, and, with all manner of truth, how 
that Arica was greatly fortified, and much more than before ; 
but our misfortune was that we took his information to be all 
contrary to the truth. 

The leaves of which we made mention above are brought 
down to this island in whole bales, and then distributed to 
the Indians by a short allowance given to each man. This 
day we had very hot weather, and a S.W. sea. By observa- 
tion we found lat. 20° 13' S. Besides the things above- 
mentioned, our prisoners informed us that at Arica the 
Spaniards had built a breastwork round about the town, and 
one also in every street, that, in case one end of the town 
were taken, they might be able to defend the other. We 
stood off and on for the greatest part of this day. In the 
afternoon we were 8 leagues and a-half distant from shore, 
with a fresh wind. That morning, moreover, we took the 
bark that was at the river of Camarones, to fill water for the 
island. 

Friday, January 28th. Last night about midnight we left 
the ship, and embarked ourselves in the bark aforementioned, 
the launch, and four canoes, with design to take Arica by 
surprise. We rowed and sailed all night, making in for the 
shore. 



4o6 THE ATTACK ON ARICA 

Saturday, January 29th. About break of day we got 
under shore, and there hid ourselves among the rocks for 
all the day long, fearing lest we should be descried by the 
enemy before we came to Arica. At this time we were 
about 5 leagues to southward of Arica, near Quebrada de San 
Vitor, a place so-called upon that coast. Night being come, 
we rowed away from there. 

Sunday, January 30th, 1680. This day (being the day 
that is consecrated in our English Calendar to the Martjn-dom 
of our glorious King Charles the First) in the morning about 
sunrise, we landed amongst some rocks at some distance of 
4 miles, more or less, to the southward from Arica. We put 
on shore 92 men in all, the rest remaining in the boats to keep 
and defend them from being surprised by the enemy, with 
the intent we might leave behind us a safe retreat in case 
of necessity. To these men we left strict orders that, if we 
made one smoke from the town or adjoining fields, they 
should come after us towards the harbour of Arica with one 
canoe ; but, in case we made two, that they should bring all 
away, leaving only 15 men in the boats. As we marched 
from our landing-place towards the town, we mounted a 
very steep hill, and saw thence no men nor forces of the 
enemy ; which caused us to hope we were not as yet descried, 
and that we should utterly surprise them. But, when we 
were come about half of the way to the town, we spied three 
horsemen, who mounted the look-out hill ; and, seeing us 
upon our march, they rode down full-speed towards the city, 
to give notice of our approach. Our Commander, Watling, 
chose out 40 of our number to attack the fort, and sent us 
away first thitherwards, the rest being designed for the 
town. We that were appointed for the fort had ten hand 
grenades among us when we gave the assault, and with them, 
as well as with our other arms, we attacked the castle, and 
exchanged several shot with our enemies. But at last, 
seeing our main body in danger of being overborne with 
the number of our enemies, we gave over that attempt on 
the fort, and ran down in all haste to the valley, to help and 
assist them in the fight. Here the battle was very desperate, 
and they killed three and wounded two more of our men 
from their out-works, before we could gain upon them. But, 
our rage increasing with our wounds, we still advanced, and 



THE ATTACK ON ARICA 407 

at last beat the enemy out of all, and filled every street in 
the city with dead bodies. The enemy made several retreats 
to several places, from one breastwork to another ; and we 
had not a sufficient number of men wherewith to man all 
places taken. Insomuch that we had no sooner beat them 
out of one place than they came another way, and manned 
it again with new forces and fresh men. 

We took in every place where we vanquished the enemy 
great number of prisoners, more indeed than peradventure 
we ought to have done or knew well what to do with ; they 
being too many for such a small body as ours was to manage. 
These prisoners informed us that we had been descried no 
less than three days before from the island of Iquique, whereby 
they were in expectation of our arrival every hour, knowing 
we still had a design to make a second attempt upon that 
place. That into the city were come 400 soldiers from Lima, 
who, besides their own, had brought 700 arms for the use 
of the country-people ; and that in the town they had 600 
armed men, and in the fort 300. 

Being now in possession of the city, or the greatest part 
thereof, we sent to the fort, commanding them to surrender ; 
but they would not vouchsafe to send us any answer. Here- 
upon we advanced towards it, and gave it a second attack, 
wherein we persisted very vigorously for a long time. Not 
being able to carry it, we got upon the top of a house that 
stood near it, and from there fired down into the fort, killing 
many of their men and wounding them at our ease and 
pleasure. But, while we were busied in this attack, the rest 
of the enemy's forces had taken again several posts of the 
town, and began to surround us in great numbers, with 
design to cut us off. Hereupon we were constrained to desist 
the second time as before from assaulting the fort, and make 
head against them. This we no sooner had done than, their 
numbers and vigour increasing every moment, we found 
ourselves to be overpowered, and consequently we thought 
it convenient to retreat to the place where our wounded men 
were, under the hands of our surgeons, that is to say our 
Hospital. At this time our new Commander, Captain Watling, 
both our quartermasters, and a great many others of our 
men were killed, besides those that were wounded and dis- 
abled. So that now, the enemy rallying against us and 



4o8 DEFEAT OF THE BUCCANEERS 

beating us from place to place, we were in a very distracted 
condition, and in more likelihood to perish every man than 
escape the bloodiness of that day. Now we found the words 
of Captain Sharp to bear a true prophecy, being all very 
sensible that we had had a day too hot for us, after that 
cruel heat in killing and murdering in cold blood the old 
Mestizo Indian whom we had taken prisoner at Iquique, 
as before was mentioned. 

Being surrounded with difficulties on all sides and in great 
disorder, having no head or leader to give orders for what 
was to be done, we were glad to turn our eyes to our good 
and old Commander, Captain Bartholomew Sharp, and beg 
of him very earnestly to commiserate our condition and carry 
us off. It was a great while that we were reiterating our 
supplications to him before he would take any notice of our 
request in this point, so much was he displeased with the 
former mutiny of our people against him, all which had been 
occasioned by the instigation of Mr Cook. But Sharp is a 
man of an undaunted courage and of an excellent conduct, 
not fearing in the least to look an insulting enemy in the face, 
and a person that knows both the theory and practical parts 
of navigation as well as most do. Hereupon, at our request 
and earnest petition, he took upon him the Command-in- 
chief again, and began to distribute his orders for our safety. 
He would have brought off our surgeons, but that they had 
been drinking while we assaulted the fort, and thus would 
not come with us when they were called. They killed and 
took of our number 28 men — 18 more that we brought off 
were desperately wounded. At this time we were extremely 
faint for want of water and victuals, whereof we had had 
none all that day. Moreover, we were almost choked with 
the dust of the town, this being so much raised by the work 
that their great guns had made that we could scarcely see 
each other. They beat us out of the town, and then followed 
us into the Savannas, or open fields, still charging us as fast 
as they could. But when they saw that we ralHed again, 
resolving to die one by another, they then ran from us into 
the town, and sheltered themselves under their breastworks. 
Thus we retreated in as good order as we could possibly 
observe in that confusion. But their horsemen followed 
us as we retired, and fired at us all the way, though they 



FLIGHT OF THE BUCCANEERS 409 

would not come within reach of our guns, for their own 
reached farther than ours, and outshot us more than one- 
third. We took the sea-side for our greater security ; which, 
when the enemy saw, they betook themselves to the hills, 
rolling down great stones and whole rocks to destroy us. 
In the meanwhile those of the town examined our surgeons 
and other men whom they had made prisoners. These gave 
them our signs that we had left to our boats that were behind 
us, so that they immediately blew up two smokes, which 
were perceived by the canoes. This was the greatest of our 
dangers. For, had we not come at the instant that we did 
to the sea-side, our boats had been gone, they being already 
under sail, and we had inevitably perished every man. Thus 
we put off from the shore, and got on board about ten o'clock 
at night, having been involved in a continual and bloody 
fight with the enemy all that day long. 



CHAPTER XVII 



A description of the Bay of Arica. They sail hence to the Port 
of Guasco, where they get provisions. A draft of the said 
port. They land again at Hilo to revenge the former affronts, 
and take what they could find 

Having ended our attempt at Arica, the next day, being 
January the last, we phed to and fro in sight of the port, 
to see if they would send out the three ships we had seen 
in the harbour to fight us. For upon them we hoped to revenge 
the defeat and disappointment we had received at the town 
the day before. But our expectations in this point also were 
frustrated, for not one of those vessels offered to stir. 



liio J^€^n'ca. 



-Td^eJti*'^'^'^' 



Gx7 dejcrwtion o/Anca 




The houses of this town of Arica are not above eleven-feet 
high, being built of earth and not of brick or timber. The 
town itself is four-square in figure, and at one corner stands 
the castle, which may easily be commanded even with small 
arms from the hill which Hes close to it. This place is the 
emharcadero, or port-town, of all the mineral towns that lie 
hereabouts, and hence is fetched all the plate that is carried 
to Lima, the head city of Peru. I took the bay of Arica as 
it appeared to me. 

410 



DEPARTURE FROM ARICA 411 

On Tuesday, February ist, we had a clear observation, 
and by it we found lat. 19° 06' S. This day we shared the 
old remains of our plate, taken in some of our former 
booties. Our shares amounted only to 37 pieces-of-eight to 
each man. 

N.B. — Here I would have my reader take notice thai from 
this day forward I kept no co^istant Diary or Journal as I had 
done before, at least for some considerable space of time, as 
you see hereafter — my disease and sickness at sea being the 
occasion of ifitermitting what I had never failed to do in all 
the course of this voyage till now. Only some few memorandums 
as my weakness gave leave I now and then committed to paper, 
which I shall give you as I find them, towards a continuance 
of this history. Thus : — 

Monday, February 14th. This night between eleven and 
twelve o'clock died on board our ship William Cook, who was 
the servant aforementioned to Captain Edmund Cook, of 
whom Ukewise mention has been often made in this Journal. 

February i6th, 1680. This day we found ourselves to be 
in lat. 27° 30' S. We had a constant breeze at S.E. and 
S.S.E. till we got about 200 leagues from land. Then, at the 
ecHpse of the moon, we had a calm for two or three days ; 
and then a breeze at N. for the space of two days ; after 
which we had a calm again for two or three days more. 

March ist. By observation, lat. 34° 01' S. At this time 
begins the dirty weather in these seas. We lay under a pair 
of courses, the wind being at S.E. and E.S.E., with a very 
great sea at S.S.E. 

March 3rd. All hands were called up, and a council held ; 
wherein, considering it was now dirty weather and late in 
the year, we bore up the helm and resolved to go to the main 
for water, and thence to leeward, and so march overland 
towards home or at least to the North Sea. But God directed 
us from following this resolution, as you shall hear hereafter. 
We being thus determined that day, we stood N.E. with a 
strong wind at S.E. and E.S.E. 

On March 5th died our Coquimbo Indian. The seventh 
we had a West-wind, our course being E. by N. The eighth 
of the said month we were put to an allowance, having only 
one cake of bread a day. March 10 th, we had a strong South- 
wind. 



412 THE PORT OF GUASCO 

On March 12th we fell in with the mainland, somewhat 
to leeward of Coquimbo. Within the island of Paxaros are 
double lands, in whose valleys are fires for the melting of 
copper, with which metal these hills abound. Off to sea- 
board it is a rocky land, and within it is sandy. About the 
distance of eight leagues to leeward is a rocky point with 
several quays or rocks about it. About one half-mile to 
leeward of this point turns in the port of Guasco. Right 
against the anchoring are three rocks, close under the shore. 

C2^ (fDe/cnfU^^ Guasco 



^(fua^u 



iff* *l. 4»/ 



Being arrived here, we landed on shore three-score men 
of our company, with design to get provisions and anything 
else that we could purchase. The people of the country 
all ran away as soon as they saw us. There was building on 
shore in this port a fire-bark of 16 or 18 tons burden, with a 
cock-boat belonging to it. We took one Indian prisoner, 
and with him went up the space of six or seven miles into 
the country to an Indian town of three-score or four-score 
houses. Thence we came back to the church, which is distant 
four miles from the sea-side ; and lodged there all night. 
Here are multitudes of good sheep and goats in the country 
adjoining this port, and it is watered with an excellent fresh- 
water river ; but the getting of the water is very difficult, 
the banks being very high or otherwise inaccessible. How- 
ever, we made a shift to get in 500 jars of water. Furthermore, 
we brought away 120 sheep and four-score goats, with which 
stock we victualled our vessel for a while. As for oxen. 



MORO DE HORSE 413 

they had driven them away farther up into the country. 
The jurisdiction of Guasco itself is governed by a Tenente, 
or Deputy-Governor, and a Friar, and is in subjection to the 
city of La Serena above-mentioned, being a dependence upon 
it. Here grows corn, peas, beans, and several other sorts of 
grain ; and for fruits this place is not inferior to Coquimbo. 
Here we found likewise a mill to grind corn, and about 200 
bushels thereof ready ground, which we conveyed on board 
our ship. Every house of any account has branches of water 
running through its yards or courts. The inhabitants had 
hidden their wine and other best things, as plate and jewels, 
having descried us at sea before our landing — so that our 
booty here, besides provisions, was inconsiderable. How- 
ever, we caught some few fowls, and eat five or six sheep, and 
likewise a great hog, which tasted very like our EngUsh pork. 
The hills are all barren, so that the country which bears fruit 
is only an excellent valley, being four times as broad as that 
of Hilo above-mentioned. These people of Guasco serve 
the town of Coquimbo with many sorts of provisions. We 
gave the Indian whom we had taken his liberty, and I took 
the port of Guasco. 

Tuesday, March 15th, 1680. This morning we departed 
from the port of Guasco aforementioned, with very little 
wind, having done nothing considerable there, excepting only 
the taking in the few provisions above-related. We were 
bent therefore to seek greater matters, having experienced 
but ill success in most of our attempts hitherto. On March 
20 th, Moro de Horse, being high doubled land, and at E. by 
N. appeared thus to us, in lat. 24° S. : — 




Moro de Horse 



At N., and at the distance of ten leagues, more or less, we 
saw the great and high hill of Moro Moreno, being so called 



414 MORO MORENO 

from its colour. It is a dark hill, but much higher and bigger 
than the other aforementioned, and appears Uke an island, 
thus : — 




MoRO Moreno 



We had now very dark weather all along the coast. On 
March 21st we were W. from the bay of Mexillones. The 
point of this bay one league upwards represents exactly a 
sugar-loaf. 

March 22nd. This day our boat and canoes went from the 
ship, well manned, to find the river Loa. They went also 
about two leagues to leeward of it, to a fishing village, but 
could find no place fit for landing ; whereupon they returned 
without doing anything. The next day another canoe of 
our company went out upon the same exploit, but found the 
same success. Yet, notwithstanding, here Sir Francis Drake 
watered, and built a church, as we were told by our pilot. 
This church is now standing on the sea-side by the river, 
whose mouth is now dry. There are several huts to windward 
of it ; and from the said church or chapel a great path goes 
up the hills ; which leads to Pica. 

On Thursday, March 24th, by observation lat. 20° 10' S. 
This day also we saw land at 18 leagues distance, more or less. 

Sunday, March 27th, we saw Mora de Sama and Lacumba 
at some distance. The same day we had an observation, 
and found by it lat. 18° 17' S. That evening we departed 
from the ship with our boats and canoes towards the coast 
of Hilo, upon which we now were. We landed and took the 
village of Hilo undescried, they scarce suspecting we could 
have any design upon that place the second time. We caught 
the friar who was chaplain to the town, and most of the 
inhabitants, asleep, making them prisoners-of-war. Here 
we heard a flying report that 5000 English had lately taken 
Panama the second time, and kept it. But this rumour, 
as it should seem, proved to be a falsity. At this time the 
river came out, and was overflowed, it being near the time 
of the freshes. Here the prisoners told us that in Arica ten 



CAPTURE OF HILO 415 

of our men were still alive, whereof three were surgeons, all 
the rest being dead of their wounds. The Spaniards sent 
word to Hilo that we had killed 70 men and wounded three 
times as many of their forces. Here the inhabitants said that 
of 45 men sent to the relief of Arica from hence there came 
home but only two alive. We filled what water we pleased 
here, but a small boat that we brought from Guasco broke 
loose from us and was staved to pieces on the rocks. Here 
we took 18 jars of wine, and good store of new figs. On 
Tuesday following we went up to the sugar-works mentioned 
in our former expedition against Hilo, and found all fruits 
just ripe and fit for eating. There we laded seven mules 
downwards with molasses and sugar. The inhabitants told 
us, moreover, that those who came to fight us when we were 
here the first time were most of them boys, and had only 
50 firearms amongst them, they being commanded by an 
English gentleman who is married at Arequipa. Likewise, 
that the owner of the sugar-works aforementioned was now 
engaged in a suit-at-law against the town of Hilo, pretending 
it was not the Enghsh who robbed him and spoilt his ingenio, 
when we were there before, but the townsmen themselves. 
This day in the evening we sailed from Hilo with dark weather 
and Uttle wind, which continued for several days afterwards. 



CHAPTER XVIII 

They depart from the Port of Hilo to the Gulf of Nicoya, where 
they take down their decks and mend the sailing of their 
ship. Forty-seven of their companions leave them, and go 
home overland. A description of the Gulf of Nicoya. They 
take two harks and some prisoners there. Several other 
remarks belonging to this voyage 

From the time that we set sail from the port of Hilo until 
Sunday, April loth, 1681, nothing happened to us that might 
be accounted remarkable ; neither did I take any notes all 
this while, by reason of my indisposition aforementioned. 
This day we could hear distinctly the breaking of the seas 
on the shore, but could see no land, the weather being ex- 
tremely dark and hazy. Notwithstanding, about noon it 
cleared up, and we found ourselves to be in the bay called 
De Malabrigo. The land in this bay runs due E. and W. 
By an observation made, we found this day 6° 35' S. We saw 
from here the leeward island of Lobos, or Seals, being nothing 
but a rocky and scraggy place. On the S.W. side thereof is 
a red hill, which is a place about the said island which the 
Indian fishermen much frequent. It is situated in lat. 6° 15' S. 
This day likewise in the evening we saw the point called 
Aguja. 

On Saturday, April i6th, we came within a league distance 
of the West-end of the island of Plate, above described. 
The next day to this, being Sunday, April 17th, 1681, our 
mutineers broke out again into an open dissension, they 
having been much dissatisfied all along the course of this 
voyage, but more especially since our unfortunate fight at 
Arica, and never entirely reconciled to us since they chose 
Captain Watling and deposed Sharp at the isle of Juan 
Fernandez, as was related above. Nothing now could appease 

416 



CAPTURE OF BONITOS 4I7 

them nor serve their turn but a separation from the rest of 
the company and a departure from us. Hereupon this day 
they departed from the ship, to the number of 47 men, all in 
company together, with design to go overland by the same 
way they came into those seas. The rest who remained 
behind did fully resolve and faithfully promise to each other 
they would stick close together. They took five slaves in 
their company, to guide and do them other service in that 
journey. This day we had lat. 1° 30' S. We sailed N.N.W. 
before the wind. 

The next day after their departure, being April i8th, we 
began to go to work about taking down one of our upper 
decks, thereby to cause our ship still to mend her sailing. 
We now made a N.W. by N. way, by observation lat. 25° N., 
the wind being at S.W. 

On April 19th we made a N.W. by N. way. By observation 
lat. 2° 45' N. In the afternoon we had cloudy weather. The 
following day likewise we made the same way, and by it 70 
miles, according to my reckoning. 

On the 2 1st in the morning we had some small showers of 
rain, and but little wind. We saw some turtle upon the 
surface of the water, and great quantity of fish. We caught 
twenty-six small dolphins. By a N.W. by N. way, we reckoned 
this day forty miles. 

April 22nd. This day we caught seven large dolphins and 
one bonito. We saw likewise whole multitudes of turtle 
swimming upon the water, and took five of them. By observa- 
tion lat. 5° 28' N. Hereabouts runs a great and strong 
current. This day we lowered the quarter-deck of our ship, 
and made it even to the upper deck. 

The following day we had but small wind, and yet great 
showers of rain. Hereupon every man saved water for him- 
self, and a great quantity was saved for the whole company. 
In the morning of this day we caught eight bonitos, and in 
the evening ten more. 

On April 24th we had both cloudy and rainy weather. 
By observation lat. 7° 37' N. ; M.D. 92 leagues. This morning 
we caught forty bonitos, and in the evening thirty more. 
In the afternoon we stood N., the wind being at S.W. by S. 

Monday, April 25th. All the night before this day we 
had huge gusts of wind and rain. At break of day we were 



41 8 THE ISLAND OF CANO 

close in with land, which upon examination proved to be the 
island of Cano. To westward thereof is very high land. 
About noon this day it cleared up, and we had lat. 8° 34' N. 
In the evening we sent a canoe to search the island. In it 
they found good water, and even ground, but withal an open 
road. At night we stood off the first watch, and the last we 
had a land wind. 

The next day following at daylight we stood in, and about 
noon we came to an anchor at the East side of the island 
aforementioned, which is not in breadth above one league. 
In the afternoon we removed from our former anchoring 
place, and anchored again within shot of the N.E. point of 
the island. In this place grows great number of coco trees all 
over the greatest part of the isle. On the North side thereof 
are many rivulets of good water to be found in sandy bays. 
We saw moreover some good hogs on shore, whereof we 
killed one, and two pigs. Here are great numbers of turtle- 
doves, and huge store of fish, but withal, very shy to be 
caught. To Northward of the island it looks thus : — 




IsLA Del Cano LAT. 8* 45' N. 

April 27th we had some rain and wind the forepart of the 
day, but the afternoon was fair. The next day in hke manner 
we had great quantity of rain. On Saturday, the 30th, about 
seven o'clock in the morning we weighed anchor from the 
aforesaid island with little wind, and stood N.W. That 
day fell much rain, with great thunder and lightning. 

Monday, May 2nd. This day we observed and found lat. 
9° N. The coast all along appeared to us very high and 
mountainous, and scarce six hours did pass but we had 
thunder, lightning, and rain ; the like continued for the two 
days following, wherein we had nothing but almost continual 
thunder and rain. 

On May 5th we had an indifferent fair day, and that 
evening we were right off of the Gulf of Nicoya. 

Friday, May 6th. This morning we saw the cape very 



CAPTURE OF TWO BARKS 419 

plain before us. N. by E. from it, are certain quays at eight 
leagues distance close under the main. We steered N.N.W. 
towards the biggest of them, at whose E.S.E. side are two or 
three small rocks. The main eastward is fine savanna, or 
plain and even land, through which goes a very great road, 
which is to be seen from the sea. At noon the port of Caldero, 
commonly called Puerto Caldero, bore N. from us. At 
which time the ebb forced us to sound in the middle of the 
gulf, where we found fourteen fathom water. After this 
we anchored nearer to the eastern quays, in 19 fathom, where 
we had oozy ground. 

Saturday, May 7th. The night before this day was very 
fair all night long. In the morning we went in a canoe, being 
several in company, to seek for a place to lay our ship in. 
Amongst the islands along the shore we found many brave 
holes, but little or no water in them, which caused us to disHke 
what we had found. On one of the said islands we happened 
to find a hat, and many empty jars of water, which showed 
us that some people had been lately there. About eight 
in the evening our ship weighed anchor at young flood, and 
about three in the afternoon we anchored again in six-fathom 
water. 

Sunday, May 8th, 1681. The night before this day, we had 
much rain, with thunder and Ughtning. The morning being 
come, our Commander, Captain Sharp, departed from the 
ship in two canoes, with 22 men in his company, out of design 
to surprise any vessels or people they could meet hereabouts. 
In the meanwhile, in the evening, we drove up with the tide 
(there being no wind) in the ship, for the space of two or three 
leagues higher, till we found but three fathom at high water. 
Here we backed astern. At this time we saw one of our 
canoes coming off from the island that was ahead of us (which 
was named Chira), calling for more men and arms, and 
saying there were two ships to be seen higher up the gulf. 
Hereupon eight of us went away with them ashore, whereof 
two joined the party aforementioned, and the six remaining 
were appointed to guard the prisoners they had taken. To 
these we showed ourselves very kind, as finding that they 
were very sensible of the cruelties of the Spaniards towards 
them and their whole nation. Here we found eight or nine 
houses and a small chapel standing. These people have 



420 SHIP-REPAIRS 

been in former times a considerable and great nation, but 
are now almost destroyed and extinguished by the Spaniards. 
We ascended a creek of the sea for a league, or thereabouts, 
and took two barks by surprisal, which were the two sail 
they had told us of before. One of these barks was the same 
we had taken before at Panama, of which I made mention 
at the beginning of this history. 

On Monday following this day we weighed anchor with 
our barks, and drove down the creek, with the tide at ebb, 
towards our ship. The prisoners that we had taken here 
informed us that, when we were to westward in these seas 
before, there lay lOO men at the port of Santa Maria. That 
our men who left us at the island of Cayboa, as was mentioned 
above, met the other bark that we lost at sea, as we were 
sailing thither, and thus all went overland together. That 
in the North Seas, near Porto Bello, they had taken a good 
ship, and that for this cause, ever since, the Spaniards had 
kept at the mouth of the river of Santa Maria three Armadilla 
barks, to stop and hinder others from going that way. On 
Monday night our Captain, with 24 men, went from the ship 
into another creek, and there took several prisoners, among 
whom was a shipwright and his men, who were judged able 
to do us good service in the altering of our ship : these 
carpenters being there actually building two great ships for 
the Spaniards. Having taken these men, they made a float 
of timber to bring down the tools and instruments they 
were working withal. Here it happened that they put several 
tools and some quantity of iron-work into a dory, to be 
conveyed down the river with the float. But this dory sank 
by the way, being overladen with iron, and one of our company, 
by name John Alexander, a Scotchman, was unfortunately 
drowned by this means. 

On Thursday following, May 12th, we sent a canoe from 
the ship, and found the dory that had been sunk. That 
evening likewise drove down the body of our drowned man 
aforementioned. Hereupon we took him up, and on Friday 
morning following threw him overboard, giving him three 
French volleys for his customary ceremony. Both this day 
and the day before we fetched water from a point near the 
houses on the island of Chira aforementioned. From the 
ship also we sent away a Spanish merchant whom we had 



LIBERATION OF PRISONERS 421 

taken among the prisoners, to fetch a certain number of 
beeves that might serve for a ransom of the new bark taken 
here. This day the weather was fair, but on Sunday following 
it rained from morning until night. 

On Monday, May i6th, we began to work all hands together 
on our ship. On Tuesday an Indian boy named Peter ran 
away from us. He belonged to Captain Sawkins, and waited 
on him as his servant. On Wednesday died an Indian slave, 
whose name was Salvador. On Thursday we heard thirty or 
forty guns fired on the main, which caused us to think that 
these would also turn to Hilo beeves. On Friday we caught 
cockles, which were as large as both our fists. At night there 
fell such dreadful rain, with thunder, lightning, and wind, 
that for the space of two hours the air was as light as day ; 
the thunder not ceasing all the while. On Sunday we con- 
tinued to work ; the night before which day we had more 
thunder, lightning, and rain. 

Wednesday, May 25th. This day we finished our great 
piece of work, viz. the taking down the deck of our ship. 
Besides which, the length of every mast was shortened ; and 
all was now served and rigged, insomuch that it would seem 
incredible to strangers, could they but see how much work 
we performed in the space of a fortnight or less. The same 
day likewise we set at liberty our Spanish carpenters, who had 
been very serviceable to us all this while, the old pilot, the 
old Spaniard taken at the isle of Iquique, and several others 
of our Spanish prisoners and slaves. To these people, but 
chiefly to the Spanish carpenters as a reward for their good 
service, we gave the new bark which we had taken at this 
place. But the old bark we thought fit to keep, and sail in 
our company, as we did, putting into her for this purpose 
six of our own men and two slaves. The next day we fell 
down as low as Vanero, a place so called hereabouts, and 
would have sailed away again that very evening but that 
our tackle gave way in hoisting our anchor, whereby we lay 
still. In the Gulf of Nicoya we experienced most commonly 
a fresh breeze, and at night a land wind. 

Friday, May 27th. This day likewise we drove down with 
the tide as low as Cavallo, another place so named in the gulf. 
Here we stayed and watered that day ; and here one Cannis 
Marcy, our interpreter, ran away from us. 



422 



THE GULF OF NICOYA 



On May 28th in the morning we sailed thence, and came 
within 29 leagues of that rich and rocky shore. Yet, 
notwithstanding, we had but seven fathom water. Here I 
saw this day a white porpoise. Behind this island is a town 
called New Cape Blanco. At Puerto Caldero, above-mentioned, 
is but one storehouse to be seen. We came to an anchor in 
the depth of seven-fathom water, at the distance of a league 
from shore, and caught five turtle. 

May 29th. This day we saw Cape Blanco. Both this day 
and the day following we continued tacking out of the gulf 
against a South wind. Here I took the ensuing demonstration 
of the Gulf of Nicoya, which, for the use of the reader, I have 
hereunto annexed. 




CHAPTER XIX 



They depart from the Gulf of Nicoya to Golfo Dulce, where they 
careen their vessel. An account of their sailings along the 
coast ; also a description of Golfo Dulce. The Spaniards 
force the Indians of Darien to a peace by a stratagem con- 
trived in the name of the English 

Wednesday, June ist, 1681. This day we had very fair 
weather, and yet but little wind. Hereupon the tide, or 
current, drove us to the Westward of Cape Blanco. Off this 
Cape, and at the distance of two miles within the sea, is 
situate a naked and nothing but barren quay. At E. by N., 
and at 4 leagues distance, Cape Blanco gave us this appear- 
ance : — 




Cabo Blanco 



LAT. 9" 30' N. 



The coast here along runs N.W. half W., and grows lower 
and lower towards Cape Guyones. This cape at 7 leagues 
distance, and at N.W. by N., appeared thus to us : — 





Cabo de Guyones 



LAT. 10" 00' N. 



At first sight the cape appeared very like two islands. 
The latter part of this day was cloudy, which hindered much 
our prospect. 

423 



424 PUERTO DE VELAS 

June 2nd. This morning we saw land, which appeared 
like several quays to us at N.W. by N., and at 7 leagues 
distance. It was the land of Puerto de Velas, and appeared 
thus : — 




Puerto de Velas 



This evening our Captain called us together and asked our 
opinions concerning the course we ought to steer. Having 
discussed the points by him proposed amongst us, we all 
resolved to bear up for Golfo Dulce, and there careen our 
vessels. This being done, we concluded to go thence to the 
cape, and cruise thereabouts under the equinoctial. We 
observed this day that our bark taken at the gulf of Nicoya 
sailed much better than our ship. 

Friday, June 3rd. The night before this day was very fair, 
and we had a fresh wind, our course being S.E. This morning 
we saw no land. In the evening the wind came about at 
S.S.W. and S.W. by S. 

June 4th. This day we stood E. and E. by N., the wind 
being W. and W. by N. In the evening we stood N.E., and 
descried land at the distance of 24 leagues, more or less, 
from Cape Blanco. 

Sunday, June 5th. Last night we lay by for all, or the 
greater part thereof. This morning we saw the island of 
Cano above described, which bore E.S.E. from us. We saw 
likewise multitudes of fish, but they would not bite. Also 
water-snakes of divers colours. 

June 6th. All last night we had rain, and with it but 
little wind— yea, scarce enough to carry us clear off from the 
island aforementioned. Towards morning we had a fresh 
wind at N.N.W. So then we stood out S. until morning, and, 
this being come, we stood N.E. by E. The land runs from 
Punta Mala to Gclfo Dulce and Punta Borrica, E.S.E. 
half S. At 9 leagues distance we laid the island of Cano. 
Punta Borrica at the same distance, or thereabouts, looks 
thus : — 



PUNTA BORRICA 425 




PUNTA BORRICA LAT. 8** oo' N. 

The West end of Golfo Dulce is very high land, and a high 
rock Hes close off it. Besides which, two other rocks lie 
farther out ; the outermost of which is a mile distant from 
the shore. The East side is also high, but breaks into small 
points and bays, growing lower and lower to Punta Borrica. 
We came about a mile within the mouth of the gulf ; then 
anchored in eight-fathom-and-a-half water. The mouth of 
the gulf is almost 3 leagues over. 

The next day, being June 7th, we weighed anchor again 
at young flood, and got about 2 leagues higher. At evening 
we came again to anchor in seven-fathom-and-a-half water. 
It rained this day until eight o'clock, more like the pouring 
down of water from the clouds than the usual falling of drops. 

Wednesday, June 8th, at daybreak we weighed anchor 
again, with a fresh sea-breeze. The higher up we went, the 
deeper we found the gulf, and at last no ground even with 
thirty-fathom of line. This day we sent our canoe away to 
seek water and a good place to lay our ship in. Having 
landed, they found one Indian and two boys, which they made 
prisoners and brought aboard ; we used them very kindly, 
giving them victuals and clothes, for they had no other than 
the bark of a tree to cover their nakedness withal. Being 
examined, they informed us that a Spanish priest had been 
amongst them, and had made peace with their nation, ordering 
them strictly not to come near any ship nor vessel that had 
red colours, forasmuch as that they were Englishmen, and 
would certainly kill them. Being asked where now the priest 
was, they answered that he was gone to a great Spanish town, 
which was distant thence four sleeps up in the countiy. 
After this the Indian left the two boys, his children, with us, 
and went to fetch more Indians to us, from a plantain-walk, 
or grove, situated by a river a league off, or thereabouts. We 
came to an anchor in a bay close by one of the Indian quays, 
where two fresh rivers were within a stone' s-throw of each 
other, in twenty-s6ven-fathom-and-a-half water, and at a 



42 6 INDIANS OF GOLFO DULCE 

cable's length from the mark of low water. The Indians 
whom our prisoner went to seek came to us several times, 
selling to us honey, plantains, and other necessaries that we 
usually bought of them or trucked for with other things. 
We also made use of their bark-logs in tallowing our ship, in 
which concern they did us good service. Their darts are 
headed with iron as sharp as any razor. 

Here one of the prisoners which we took at the Gulf of 
Nicoya informed us by what means, or rather stratagem of 
war, the Spaniards had forced a peace upon the Indians of 
the province of Darien since our departure thence. The 
manner was as follows : A certain Frenchman who ran from 
us at the island of Tavoga to the Spaniards was sent by them 
in a ship to the river's mouth, which disembogues from that 
province into the South Sea. Being arrived there, he went 
ashore by himself in a canoe, and told the Indians that the 
English who had passed that way were come back from their 
adventures in the South Sea. Withal he asked them if they 
would not be so kind and friendly to the Englishmen as to 
come aboard and conduct them on shore. The poor deceived 
Indians were very joyful to understand this good news, and 
thus 40 of the chief men among them went on board the 
Spanish vessel, and were immediately carried prisoners-of-war 
to Panama. Here they were forced to conclude a peace, 
though upon terms very disadvantageous to them, before 
they could obtain their liberty. 

These poor and miserable Indians of Golfo Dulce would 
come every day into our company, and eat and drink very 
famiharly with us all the time we were there. We laid our 
ship on ground, but the water did not ebb low enough to see 
her keel. Whilst we were careening our vessel, we built a 
house upon the shore, both to lodge and eat in, and every 
day we caught plenty of good fish. On Sunday, June 12th, 
the work of careening our ship going on in due order, we 
came to cleanse our hold, and here on a sudden both myself 
and several others were struck totally blind with the filth and 
nastiness of the said place. Yet soon after we recovered our 
sight again without any other help than the benefit of the 
fresh and open air, which dissipated those malignant vapours 
that had oppressed our eyes. On June 14th we had a great 
and fierce tornado, with which our cable broke, and, had it 



KING CHARLES' HARBOUR 427 

not then happened to be high water at that instant, we had 
been lost inevitably. However, we had the good fortune to 
shore her up again, and by that means secure ourselves from 
farther danger. On June 21st we weighed anchor again, and 
went a league higher than the former place. Here we watered, 
and in the meanwhile left men below to cut wood. 

Thursday, June 23rd. This day ran away from us two 
negroes. The name of one of them was Hernando, who was 
taken with Don Thomas de Argandona on the coast of 
Guayaquil, as was mentioned above. The other was named 
Silvestre, having been taken at the town of Hilo. Following 
the example of these aforementioned, on Monday, June 27th, 
that is, four days after, two more of our prisoners endeavoured 
to make their escape, both of them slaves. One of these was 
named Francisco, who was a negro, and had been taken in 
the coco-ship mentioned before. The name of the other was 
also Francisco, and he was an Indian born, who was taken 
before Panama. Their attempts to escape succeeded not, for 
we caught them both again before they got on shore. On 
Tuesday following I went to sail up and down the gulf in the 
little bark belonging to our ship ; and, having viewed all 
places, took this description of Golfo Dulce here inserted. 
Our captain gave this gulf the name of King Charles, his 
Harbour, 



CHAPTER XX 

They depart from Golfo Dulce, to go and cruize under the 
equinoctial. Here they take a rich Spanish vessel with 
37,000 pieces-of -eight, besides plate and other goods. They 
take also a packet-hoat hound from Panama to Lima. An 
account of their sailings and the coast alo7tg 

Our vessel being now careened and all things in a readiness 
for our departure, on Tuesday, June 28th, in the afternoon, 
we weighed anchor to go to sea again, turning out towards 
the mouth of Golfo Dulce. Our design was to cruize under 
the equinoctial, as had been concluded upon before, thereby 
to get what purchase we could by sea, seeing the greatest part 
of our attempts on land had proved hitherto very unsuccessful 
to us. 

Wednesday, June 29th. Both the night last past and 
this day we had rainy weather. About three in the afternoon 
a fresh gale sprang up at S.W. and S.S.W., our course being 
S.E. and S.E. by S. At five this evening the gulf bore N.W. 
by W., 7 leagues distant, and Punta Borrica 3 leagues and 
a-half distant. 

Thursday, June 30th. All night past we enjoyed a fresh 
gale at S.S.W. We sailed in the bark (where I was) better 
than the man-of-war, for so we called the Trinity vessel, 
notwithstanding that she was newly cleansed and tallowed. 
This day we had hazy weather, and I reckoned myself from 
Punta Borrica S.S.E. 18 leagues and a-half. 

July 1st, 1681. Last night we had two or three tornados. 
I reckoned this day a S.S.E. way, and by a clear observation 
found lat. 6° 10' N. We saw great quantities of fish as we 
sailed this day. 

July 2nd, We made a S.E. way, and our reckoning was 
64 by it. By observation I found lat. 5° 20' N. At noon the 
same day we had a fresh gale at S.W., with some rain. 

428 


DEPARTURE FROM GOLFO DULCE 429 

July 3rd. We had hazy weather. We made a S.E. by S. 
way, and 37. 

Monday, July 4th. The night just past was windy, with 
rain, which forced us to hand our top-sails. Our reckoning 
this day was a S.E. way, and 100 miles. 

July 5th. We had a clear night, and withal a fresh gale. 
By this we made a S.E. way. Our latitude this day gave 
us 2° 20' N. This morning we saw land Southward of us, 
lying in low hummocks. It was the point, so called, of 
Manglares. 

Wednesday, July 6th. We turned up along shore, and by 
observation took this day lat. 2° 02' N. Hereabouts with 
every new moon is experienced a windward current. In the 
evening of this day we were close in with low land. We had 
windy weather and a great sea. 

Thursday, July 7th. This day by observation we found 
lat. 01° 48' N. In the evening of the said day we lost sight 
of the said ship. 

The next day, being July 8th, we saw the ship again, whose 
loss began to create some concern in our minds. This day we 
made very high land all along as we went. And the port, or 
rather bay, of San Matteo, or St Matthew, appeared to us like 
several islands. 

Saturday, July 9th. This morning we stood fair in with 
the port of Tucames. Off the highest part of the land there 
seems to lie a quay. At the North-east point of the port it 
appears exactly thus : — 




Puerto de Tucames 

This day at noon we had a clear observation, which gave 
us lat. 01° 22' N. 

Sunday, July 10 th. Last night we stood off to sea, thereby 
to keep clear of the shore. This day observation showed us 
lat. 01° 31' N. About noon the same day we happened to spy 
a sail, to which immediately we gave chase. We bore up 
one point of the compass, thereby to hinder her laskmg away ; 



430 CAPTURE OF A RICH PRIZE 

but notwithstanding in the evening lost sight of her again. 
However, our great ship got up with her, and at about eight 
o'clock at night made her a prize. She proved to be the same" 
ship, named San Pedro, which we had taken the last year, 
being then bound from Truxillo to Panama, and laden with 
wine, gunpowder, and pieces-of-eight, whereof mention was 
made in its due place. Thus this same bottom became doubly 
fortunate to us, being twice taken by us in the space of fourteen 
months. For she had on board her now 21,000 pieces of eight, 
in eight chests, and in bags 16,000 more, besides plate. 

Monday and Tuesday, the nth and 12th of the said month, 
we made in for the shore. Our prize was so deeply laden that 
she seemed to be buried in the water. She had 40 men on 
board her, besides some merchants and friars. On Tuesday 
an observation gave us lat. 1° 20' N. 

Wednesday, July 13th. This day we dared not adventure 
into the bay of San Matteo, because we saw some Indians, 
who had made a great fire on shore, which, as we judged, was 
designedly done to give intelHgence of our arrival. Hereupon 
we bore away for the river of Santiago, six leagues distant, 
more or less, from the bay aforementioned, to the North-east. 
Thursday, Friday, and Saturday of the said week we spent 
in taking out what parcels of coco-nut we thought fit from on 
board the prize, which was chiefly laden with the said com- 
modity. This being done, we cut down the main-mast by 
the board, and gave them only their main-sail, and thus 
turning the ship loose sent away in her all our old slaves, for 
the good service they had done us, taking new ones from the 
prize in their room. One only we still detained, who was 
Francisco, the negro that attempted to run away by swimming 
ashore, as was mentioned above. 

Sunday, July 17th. This day we went from the ship, and 
found the river of Santiago above-mentioned. At the mouth 
of this river we stayed Monday and Tuesday following to 
take in water, which we now much wanted. On the sides of 
the river we found good store of plantains. Our fresh water 
we fetched the distance of four miles up the river. We saw 
several Indians, but could not speak with them they were so 
shy of us, being forewarned by the Spaniards not to come 
near us. 

On Wednesday, July 20 th, we shared our plunder among 



CABO PASSAO 



431 



ourselves, or rather this day made part of the dividend of 
what we had taken, the rest being reserved to another day. 
Our prisoners being examined, informed us that the Spaniards 
had taken up our anchors and cables which we left behind 
us at the isle of Juan Fernandez. Also that they had 
surprised the Mosquito Indian that we left behind us there 
on shore, by the hght of a fire which he made in the night 
upon the isle. 

Tuesday, July 21st. All the last four-and-twenty hours 
we stood off and on. The next day we shared the rest of our 
things taken in the prize, as also the money that was in the 
bags ; the rest we laid up to divide upon another occasion, 
especially after such time as we were got through the Strait 
of Magellan. Our dividend amounted to the sum of 234 
pieces-of-eight to each man. Our prisoners informed us this 
day that a new Viceroy of Peru was arrived at Panama, and 
that he dared not adventure up to Lima in a ship of 25 guns 
that was at Panama for fear of meeting with us at sea, but 
had chosen rather to wait until the Armada came down from 
Lima to safeguard and conduct him thither. 

July 23rd we had a fresh breeze at S.W., and the next 
day a clear observation, which gave us only latitude 14' N. 
This day Cape San Francisco at N.E. appeared thus to us : — 




Cabo de San Francisco 



Monday, July 25th. This day we observed latitude 01° 
20' S., and we had a south-west wind. 

July 26th. This morning we had a very great dew fallen 
in the night last past. The weather in like manner was very 
close. 

On Wednesday, July 27th, Cape Passao, at S.S.W. and 
at 6 leagues distance appeared thus : — 




Cabo Passao 



432 CAPTURE OF A PACKET-BOAT 

The same morning about seven o'clock we spied a sail 
E.S.E. from us, under the shore. We presently gave her 
close chase, as eagerly as we could, and about noon came up 
with her. But several of the people belonging to her were 
already got on shore, whereby they made their escape from 
being taken our prisoners. These were chiefly a friar, who 
was either a passenger or chaplain to the vessel, and five 
negroes. She proved to be a harco d'adviso, or packet-boat, 
that was going with letters from Panama to Lima. In this 
bark we took among other prisoners two white women who 
were passengers to the same place. Both these and the rest 
of the prisoners told us they had heard at Panama that we 
were all gone out of these seas homewards overland, and that 
made them adventure now up towards Lima — otherwise they 
had not come. This day and the Thursday following we spent 
in taking out of the packet-boat what we could find in her, 
which all were things of no considerable value, they having 
scarce brought any thing with them but the packet. They 
told us, moreover, that the new Viceroy of Peru, of whom we 
made mention above, was setting forth from Panama under 
the conduct of three sail of ships, the one of i6, the other of 8, 
and the third of 6 guns. That a general peace was all over 
Europe, excepting only that the EngHsh had wars with the 
Algerines by sea and the Spaniards by land. Having got 
what we could out of the prisoners and the vessel, we gave 
them their hberty, and sent them away in the same bark, 
being desirous not to encumber ourselves with more than we 
could well manage. That night we stood out to sea all night 
long, most of our men being fuddled. 




CHAPTER XXI . 

They take another Spanish ship richly laden under the equinoctial. 
They make several dividends of their booty among themselves. 
They arrive at the isle of Plate, where they are in danger of 
being all massacred by their slaves and prisoners. Their 
departure thence for the port and bay of Paita, with design to 
plunder the said place 

The next morning after we had turned away the packet-boat 
aforementioned, the weather being very close, we spied 
another sail creeping close under our lee. This vessel looked 
mighty big, so that we thought she had been one of their chief 
men-of-war who was sent to surprise or destroy us. Notwith- 
standing, our brave Commander, Captain Sharp, resolved to 
fight her, and either to take the said vessel, though never so 
big, or that she should take us. To this effect, coming nearer 
to her, we easily perceived she was a merchant-ship of great 
bulk, as most of your Spanish vessels are, and very deeply 
laden. Being up with them, those within her fired three or 
four guns at us first, thinking to make their party good against 
us. But we answered them briskly with a continual volley 
of small arms, so that they soon ran down into the hold, and 
surrendered, crying aloud for quarter. As it should seem, we 
had killed in that volley their Captain and one seaman, and 
also wounded their boatswain : which loss of their commander 
daunted them so suddenly, he being a man of good repute in 
those seas. Captain Sharp, with twelve more of our company, 
entered her the first. In this vessel I saw the most beautiful 
woman that I ever saw in all the South Sea. The name of 
the captain of this vessel was Don Diego Lopez, and the ship 
was called El Santo Rosario, or The Holy Rosary. The men 
we found on board her were about the number of 40, more 
or less. 

2 F . 433 



434 CAPTURE OF EL SANTO ROSARIO 

Having examined our prisoners, they informed us that the 
day before they set sail from El Callao, from which port they 
were going towards Panama, our men whom they had taken 
prisoners at Arica were brought into that place and very 
civilly entertained there by all sorts of people, but more 
especially by the women. That one of our surgeons, whom 
we suspected to be Mr Bullock, was left behind, and remained 
still at Arica. 

We lay at anchor from Friday, July 29th, which was the 
day we took this prize, until Wednesday following, at the 
same place under Cape Passao as we anchored before. Here 
we sank the bark that we had taken at the Gulf of Nicoya, 
being willing to make use of what rigging she had, and also 
to contract our number of men. In the meanwhile we took 
out of the prize much plate and some money ready coined, 
besides 620 jars of wine and brandy, and other things. Thus, 
leaving only the fore-mast standing in the said vessel, we 
turned her away, as we had done the others before, together 
with all the prisoners in her, giving them their liberty not to 
be encumbered with them, being desirous to spare our 
provisions as much as we could. We detained only one man, 
named Francisco, who was a Biscayner, because he reported 
himself to be the best pilot of those seas. This being done, 
we shared all the plate and linen taken in our prize, and 
weighed thence, standing S.S.E. with a fresh wind that 
sprang up. 

Friday, August 4th. This day we shared the ready money 
taken in The Rosario, our last prize. Our dividend came 
to 94 pieces-of-eight each man. Cape Passao, under which 
all these prizes were taken, at N.E. appears thus : — 




Cabo Passao 



The land runs S.E., and is for 5 leagues together to windward 
of this cape, all mountainous and high land. 

The next day, being August 5th, we completed our 
dividends, sharing this day all our odd money, ready-coined, 
and plate, with some other things. 



MUTINY OF SLAVES AND PRISONERS 435 

Saturday, August 6th. This day perusing some letters 
taken in the last prize, I understood by them that the 
Spaniards had taken prisoner one of the last party of our men 
that left us. Also that they were forced to fight all their way 
overland as they went, both against the Spaniards and the 
Indians, these having made peace with the Spaniards since 
our departure, as was mentioned above. That our EngHshmen 
had killed, amongst other Spaniards, the brother of Captain 
Assientos and Captain Alonso, an officer so named. Moreover, 
that ten sail of privateers were coming out of the North Sea, 
with intent to march over-land into the South Sea, as we had 
done before, but that they were prevented, being forced back 
by the great rains that fell near the islands called Samballas. 

On August 7th we had very fair weather, notwithstanding 
some stiong winds from shore, and also a strong current to 
leeward. This ran so fierce against us the next day, August 
8th, that in the space of the last four-and-twenty hours we 
lost three leagues. 

Tuesday, August 9th, we saw the port and town of Manta, 
this being nothing but sixteen or seventeen stragghng houses, 
with a large and high brick church belonging to it. What we 
got in the day by the help of the wind we lost in the night by 
the current. The same fortune we had the next day, for we 
still gained no way all this while. 

Thursday, August nth. All last night we had but little 
wind ; this day we had a violent current to windward, as 
before, with some gusts of wind. However, by the help of 
these we made shift to get to windward of the isle of Plate. 

August I2th, in the morning, we came to an anchor at the 
aforesaid isle. We sent our boat ashore with men, £is we had 
done formerly, to kill goats, but we found them to be 
extremely shy and fugitive compared with what they were 
the last year. Here it was that our quartermaster, James 
Chappel, and myself fought a duel together on shore. In the 
evening of this day our slaves agreed among themselves and 
plotted to cut us all in pieces, not giving quarter to any, when 
we should be buried in sleep. They conceived this night 
afforded them the fittest opportunity by reason that we were 
all in drink. But they were discovered to our Commander 
by one of their own companions, and one of them named 
Santiago, whom we brought from Iquique, leapt overboard ; 



436 



ISLE OF SOLANGO 



who, notwithstanding, was shot in the water by our Captain, 
and thus punished for his treason. The rest laid the fault on 
that slave, and so it passed, we being not wilHng to inquire 
any farther into the matter, having terrified them with the 
death of their companion. We lay at this isle until Tuesday 
following, and in the meanwhile gave our vessel a pair of boots 
and tops^, being very merry all the while with the wine and 
brandy we had taken in the prize. 

On Tuesday, August i6th, in the afternoon, we weighed 
thence with a S.W. wind. The island at N.W. from us gave 
us this following appearance : — 




Isle de la Plata 



Wednesday, August 17th, the island at E., this morning 
and at 2 leagues and a-half distance appeared thus : — 




Island of Plate 

All the day long until the evening we had a leeward current, 
but then I could not perceive any. 

Thursday, August i8th. This morning we were to wind- 
ward of the island of Solango. In the night before we had 
continual misty rain. At noon the aforesaid island bore 
N. by E. of us, and at 3 leagues distance appeared thus : — 




Isle de Solango 



^ Perhaps a play upon the phrase ' topsy-boosy ' = drunk. A person 
very drunk is said to be ' in his boots ', which Bishop Kennet {Glossary — 



DEPARTURE FOR PAITA 437 

About 3 leagues from Solango are two rocks, called Los 
Ahorcados. They appear both high and black to the view. 
Besides this N.N.E. from Point St Helena is a high rock, 
which to windward thereof runs shoaling for the space of 
half-a-mile under water. It is distant about eight leagues, 
more or less, from the said point, and is called Chanduy. At 
this place, and upon this rock, was lost the ship aforementioned 
that was ordered from these seas to the aid of our most 
gracious Sovereign, King Charles the First, late King of 
England. Said ship had on board, as the Spaniards relate, 
to the sum of many milUons of pieces-of-eight ; all which 
quantity of plate was sent as a present to our King, being 
then in his troubles, by the worthy merchants of Lima. The 
rock aforementioned lies about two leagues distant from the 
mainland. 

August 19th. This day our pilot told us that, since we 
were to windward, a certain ship that was coming from Lima 
bound for Guayaquil ran ashore on Santa Clara, losing there 
in money to the value of 100,000 pieces-of-eight ; which 
otherwise, peradventure, we might very fortunately have 
met with. Moreover, that the Viceroy of Peru had beheaded 
their great Admiral Ponce, for not coming to fight and 
destroy us while we were at Gorgona. This evening we 
saw point St Helena at the distance of ten leagues to S.S.E. 
from us. 

August 20th. This day we had both misty and cold 
weather. In the afternoon we saw Point St Helena, at 
N.E. by N. and at 7 leagues distance, more or less. 

On Sunday, August 21st, we had a fair and clear day. I 
reckoned myself this day to be about 25 leagues to the 
Southward of St Helena. 

August 22nd. This morning about two o'clock we came 
close in with the shore. We found ourselves to leeward of a 
certain point called Punta de Mero, which is nothing else 
than a barren and rocky point. Here runs an eddy current 
under the shore. 

Tuesday, August 23rd. This day in the morning we had 
but little wind. At noon it blew fresh again. We made all 
day but short trips, and reefed topsails. 

in his Parochial Antiquities. 1695) calls "a country proverb ". Cf. ' to 
go to bed in one's boots *, i.e. very drunk. 



438 DEPARTURE FOR PAITA 

Wednesday, August 24th. This morning a great dew fell. 
At noon we were W. from Cape Blanco. We found by 
observation lat. 4° 13' S. We resolved now to bear up for 
Paita, and take it by surprise if possible, thereby to provide 
ourselves with many necessaries that we wanted. 



CHAPTER XXII 

They arrive at Paita, where they are disappointed of their expecta- 
tions, as not daring to land, seeing all the country alarmed 
before them. They hear away for the Strait of Magellan. 
Description of the hay and port of Paita, and Colan. An 
account of their sailings toivards the Strait aforementioned 

Thursday, August 25th. The night before this day we stood 
off to sea for fear of the shore and lest we should be descried 
from the coast of Paita, to which we were now pretty nigh. 
About noon this day we began to stand in again, and saw 
the homing of the land, though with hazy weather. The next 
day, being August 26th, we had cold winds, great dews, and 
dry weather. 

Saturday, August 27th. All this day, but more especially 
in the morning, we had many fogs. In the afternoon we saw 
la Silla de Paita at W.S.W., being about five leagues distant 
from it. 

Sunday, August 28th. Last night about ten o'clock we 
were close into land, at the distance of half-a-league, more or 
less, to leeward of the island of Lobos. We continued our 
course all that night, and about break of day found ourselves 
close under Pena Horadada, a high and steep rock so called. 
Hence we sailed with a land-wind, and sent away from the 
ship two canoes well manned and armed, with good hopes to 
have taken the town of Paita undescried. But, as it should 
seem, they had already received news of our coming or being 
upon that coast, and also had received supplies of forces that 
were sent them from the city of Piura, distant thence 12 
leagues up-country. These supplies consisted chiefly of three 
companies of horse and foot, all of them being armed with 
firearms. Besides this, they had made a breastwork along 
the sea-side for the defence of the town and the great church, 

439 



440 PAITA; COLAN 

which Hes at the outermost part of the town. From these 
places, as also from a hill that covers the town, they fired at 
our men, who were innocently rowing towards shore with 
their canoes. This preposterous firing was the preservation 
of our people, for, had the Spaniards permitted our men to 
come ashore, they had assuredly destroyed them every man. 
But fear always hinders that nation of victory, at least in 
most of our attempts. 

Our men, perceiving themselves to be discovered and the 
enemy prepared for their reception, hereupon retreated, and 
came on board the ship again without attempting to land or 
do anything else in relation to the taking of the place. We 
judged there could not be less than 150 fire-arms, and four 
times as many lances upon the shore, all in readiness to 
hinder our people from landing. Within the town our pilot 
told us there might be 150 families. 

Being disappointed of our expectations at Paita, we stood 
down the bay towards Colan. This is another town so called, 
and which exceeds Paita three times. It is chiefly inhabited 
by fishermen, and thence they send fish to most inland towns 
of Peru, and also serve Paita with water from the river Colan, 
not far distant from the town. It is two leagues, more or 
less, from the town of Paita aforementioned to Colan, and 
thence to the river one league, although the houses of Colan 
do reach almost to the river. The town of Colan itself is 
inhabited only by Indians, and these are all rich because they 
will be paid in ready money for everything they do for 
the Spaniards. But the town of Paita is chiefly inhabited 
by Spaniards, though there be also some Indians ; but the 
Spaniards do not suffer the Indians to be any great gainers 
or grow rich under them. 

About ten o'clock a young breeze sprang up, and with 
that we stood away W., and W. by S. Within a little while 
it blew so fresh that we were forced to reef our topsails, the 
weather being very dark and hazy. I took the port of Paita 
and bay of Colan, as they lay exactly situated (see map). 

Monday, August 29th. All our hopes of doing any further 
good upon the coasts of the South Sea being now frustrated, 
seeing we were descried before our arrival wherever we came, 
we resolved unanimously to quit all other attempts and bear 
away for the Strait of Magellan, in order to return home- 



THEY SAIL FOR MAGELLAN 441 

wards either for England or some of our plantations in the 
West Indies. This day we had a great dew, and I reckoned 
myself W.S.W. from Paita 13 leagues and a-half, with very 
little wind. So we stood E. 

The next day, August 30th, we had misty weather. We 
made a W.S.W, way, and by it 5 leagues and one-third. In 
the afternoon of this day the wind freshened again, having 
been but little before, and we stood E.S.E. 

The last day of August we had very fair weather. I 
believed now that the wind was settled at S.E. and S.S.E. 
We made a S.S.W. way, and 21 leagues and two-thirds. 






September ist. Last night was very cloudy, but withal 
we had a fresh gale. Our reckoning was a S.W. by S. way, 
and that we had made 16 leagues and two-thirds. 

September 2nd. We reckoned a S.W. way, and by it 
26 leagues and two-thirds. This day we had an observation 
and found lat. 7° 40' S. 

September 3rd brought us both cloudy and misty weather. 
We made a W.S.W. way, and 14 leagues. 

September 4th. This day the wind was at E.S.E. and 
sometimes E., coming in many flaws. We had a S.W. by S. 
way, and reckoned 23 leagues and two-thirds. We had a 
great sea from S. 

Monday, September 5th, we had great winds, and a high 
and short sea. Our way was S.S.W. and half-W. by which 
we reckoned 28 leagues and two-thirds of a league. 



442 THEY SAIL FOR MAGELLAN 

September 6th we had a very fresh wind at S.E. by E. 
with an indifferent smooth sea. By observation we found 
this day latitude 12° 00' S. We made a S.W. by S. way, 
and 28 leagues and one-third. 

Wednesday, September 7th, we had a very fresh wind. 
We reckoned a S.W. by S. way, and 36 leagues. We observed 
latitude 13° 24' S. We make now for each mess a plum- 
pudding of salt water and wine lees. 

On the 8th we enjoyed a fresh gale of wind, though with 
hazy weather. Our reckoning was a S.W. by S. way, and 
hereby 25 leagues and one-third of a league. 

September 9th we made a S.W. by S. way, and 21 leagues 
and a-third. In the afternoon the wind came about some- 
thing more S., allowing us a S.W. course. 

Saturday, September 10 th. All last night past and this 
morning the wind was very fresh at E. Our way was S.S.W. 
and by our reckoning 35 leagues and one-third. The weather 
now was warm. An observation this day gave us latitude 
i6°4o'S. 

September nth we had whiffling winds. A S.W. half S. 
way, and thereby 12 leagues and two-thirds. By an observa- 
tion we found 17° 10' S. Now we had a very great sea, so 
that we took in our sprit-sail. 

September 12th. All the night before this day we were 
under a pair of courses ; yet this morning we heaved out 
main-topsail. We made a W.S.W. way, and 17 leagues and 
one-third. By observation we found lat. 17° 30' S. 

The 13th. During last night we had huge and great storms 
of wind. In the morning our goose-head gave way, so that 
at about noon we were forced to lie by till four in the afternoon 
to mend it. Our course was S.W. half W. and our reckoning 
29 leagues and two-thirds of a league. Lat. by observation 
i8°i2'S. 

Wednesday, September 14th. This day we had very hazy 
weather. We made a S.S.W. way, and 20 leagues. 

September 15th. This day likewise we had a S.S.W. way, 
and reckoned 23 leagues and one-half. Our observation 
taken this day gave us 20° 09' S. 

On September i6th we had a clear day, a S.W. half S. way, 
and made 16 leagues and two-thirds. We found by observa- 
tion lat. 20° 48' S. 



THEY SAIL FOR MAGELLAN 443 

The 17th. Last night was very calm. Also this day, it 
being a full moon. We reckoned a S.W. way, and only by 
reason of the calmness of the weather 9 leagues and one-third 
of a league. We had an observation which afforded us 
2i°o8'S. lat. 

Sunday, September i8th. Last night a wind sprang up 
at S.S.E. which the morning of this day freshened at S.E. 
We made a W.S.W. way, and by it 18 leagues. Moreover, 
this day we had a clear observation that showed us lat. 
2i°3o'S. 

September 19th. All last night we had a very fresh wind, 
but this morning it came about to E. by S. and E.S.E. with 
hazy weather. I reckoned a S.W. by S. way, and 22 leagues. 

September 20th. This day gave us a fresh wind, hazy 
weather, a S. by W. way, and hereupon 23 leagues and 
one-third. 

September 21st. This day also the fresh gale continued, 
with cloudy, and sometimes misty, weather. Our reckoning 
showed us a S. by W. way as the day before, and by it 28 
leagues and one-third. By an observation made we found 
lat. 25° 15' S. 

Thursday, September 22nd. This day we had a very fresh 
wind. We reckoned a S. half W. way, and by that 29 leagues 
and two-thirds. An observation taken gave us lat. 26° 42' S. 
We observed this day a N.E. sea, which seemed very strange 
to us. 

The next day we had several showers of small rain. My 
reckoning was a S. by W. way, and thereupon 26 leagues. 
We found by observation lat. 27° 57' S. 

September 24th. We had hazy weather, and the wind 
not so fresh at E.S.E., with a smooth sea. We made a S.S.W. 
way half-westerly, and 23 leagues and two-thirds. This day 
also an observation gave us lat. 28° 57' S. I reckoned now 
that we were distant from Paita 302 leagues and two-thirds. 

Sunday, September 25th. This day we had not much 
wind, and hazy weather. At noon the wind came E., then 
E.N.E., and then again N.E. by E. We reckoned a S. by E. 
way, half-E. and 55. 

Monday 26th. We had hazy weather and a fresh ^^ind 
at N.E. We reckoned a S.E. half S. way, and 24 leagues. 
In the afternoon we experienced a N.N.E. sea, and then soon 



444 THEY SAIL FOR MAGELLAN 

after a N.N.E. wind. After this a N. wind, and that but 
very Httle. 

September 27th. All the night before this day we had a 
fresh wind at N.N.E. About eight this morning it came about 
again to N.N.W. We made a S.E. by S. way, and 38 leagues. 
By observation I found lat. 32° 30' S. Now we enjoyed a 
very smooth sea and fair weather. 

Wednesday, September 28th. In the night past a very 
fresh wind at N.N.W. and N.W. At break of day we had a 
wind heaving us a-back at once. At noon again the wind was 
at S.W., our course being S.E. This morning we took down 
our top-gallant masts. We made a S.E. by E. way, and on 
this road 27 leagues and two-thirds. By observation lat. 
33° 16' S., a S.W. sea. 

On the 29th we had very windy and hazy weather, with 
some rain now and then. All last night we handed our 
main-top-sail. We made a S.E. by E. way, and 32 leagues 
and two-thirds. We had a S.W. sea and wind. 

Friday, September 30th. This day we had fresh winds 
between S.W. and W. We reckoned a S.E. half-S. way, and 
thereupon 44 leagues. By observation we found lat. 35° 54' S. 

October ist. The wind this day was not very fresh, but 
varying. My reckoning was a S.E. half-S. way, and twenty- 
four leagues. An observation gave us 36° 50' S. This day 
I finished another quadrant, being the third I finished in this 
voyage. We had a S.W. sea, with showers of rain and gusts 
of wind. 

Sunday, October 2nd. The wind this day was hanging 
between W.N.W. and N.W. by N. We made a S.E. by S. 
way, and 33 leagues and two-thirds. By observation we 
found 38° 14' S. About noon we had a fresh wind at N.W. 
and S.W. 

October 3rd. Last night in the fore-part' thereof was clear, 
but the latter was rainy. The wind very fresh at N.W. by N., 
but this day we had Httle wind, and cloudy weather, a S.W. 
by W. wind, and a S.E. by S. way, by which we reckoned 
33 leagues and one-third. 

October 4th. We had a clear night and very fresh wind. 
We reckoned a S.E. by S. way, and thereby 43 leagues. By 
observation, lat. 41° ^4' S. This day also fell several showers 
of rain. 



THEY SAIL FOR MAGELLAN 445 

October 5th. We had a windy night, and a clear day. 
We reckoned a S.S.E. half E. way, and 44 leagues and two- 
thirds. By observation lat. 43° 26' S. The weather now was 
very windy, causing a huge tempestuous sea. The wind at 
N.W. and N.W. by N. blowing very high. 

October 6th. This day the wind was still at N.W., and yet 
not so fresh as it was yesterday ; the weather very foggy and 
misty. As for the wind, it came in gusts, so that we were 
forced to hand our top-sails, and sprit-sail. We reckoned 
a S.E. half S. way, and thereby 43 leagues and one-third. 
The seas now were not so high as for some days past. In the 
evening we scudded away under our fore-course. 

Friday, October 7th. Last night was very cloudy, and 
this day both dark and foggy weather with small rain. We 
made a S.E. way, and 30 leagues and two-thirds. A fresh 
wind at N.N.W. and N.W. We keep still under a fore-course, 
not so much for the freshness of the wind as the closeness of 
the weather. 

October 8th. We had a clear night the night before this 
day, and a strong gale, insomuch that this day we were 
forced to take in our fore-sail, and loosen our mizzen, which 
was soon blown to pieces. Our eldest seamen said that they 
were never in the like storm of wind before — the sea was all 
in a foam. In the evening it dulled a little. We made a 
S.E. half E. way, and 18 leagues, with very dark weather. 

Sunday, October 9th. All the past night we had a furious 
W.N.W. wind. We set our sail a-drough^, and so drove to 
the southward very much, and almost incredibly if an 
observation had not happened, which gave us lat. 48° 15' S. 
We had a very stiff gale at W.N.W. with a great sea from W., 
which met with a S.S.W. sea as great as it. Now the weather 
was very cold, and we had one or two frosty mornings. 
Yesterday in the afternoon we had a very great storm of hail. 
At noon we bent another mizzen. 

Monday, October loth. This day brought us a fresh wind 
at N.W. and N.N.W. We made a S.E. half-E. way, and by 
it 44 leagues. By observation we found lat. 49° 41' S. 
I reckoned myself now to be east from Paita 69 leagues 
and a-half. 

^ Southwards. This is the only example of the use of this adverb 
given in N.E.D. 



446 THEY SAIL FOR MAGELLAN 

Tuesday, Oct. nth. Last night we had a small time calm. 
This day was both cloudy and rainy weather. The wind 
at S.W. and S.S.W. so furious that at ten o'clock this morning 
we scudded under a main-sail. At noon we lowered our fore- 
yard while we sailed. We made a S.E. by E. way, and 30 
leagues. 



CHAPTER XXIII 

The Buccaneers arrive at a place incognito, to which they give the 
name of the Duke of York's Islands. A description of the 
said islands and of the gulf, or lagoon, wherein they lie, so 
far as it was searched. They remain there many days by 
stress of weather, not without great danger of being lost. 
An account of some other remarkable things that happened 
there 

Wednesday, October 12th. All the night before this day 
we had many high winds. I reckoned an E.S.E. way, and 
twenty leagues, for our vessel drove at a great rate. Moreover, 
we were in lat-. 50° 50' S., so that our easting from Paita by 
my account ought to be 10 1 leagues, or thereabouts. 

This morning, about two hours before day, we happened 
by great accident to spy land. It was the great mercy of 
God, which had always attended us in this voyage, that 
saved us from perishing at this time, for we were close ashore 
before we saw it ; and our foreyard, which we most needed 
on this occasion, was taken down. The land we had seen was 
very high and towering ; and here appeared to be many 
islands scattered up and down. We steeied in with what 
caution we could, between them and the main, and at last, 
God be praised, arrived at a place^ or rather bay, where we 
perceived ourselves to be land-locked, and, as we thought, 
pretty safe from the danger of those tempestuous seas. From 
here we sent away our canoe to sound and search the fittest 
place for anchoring. At this time one of our men, named 
Henry Shergall, as he was going into our sprit-sail-top, 
happened to fall into the water, and was diowned before any 
help could be had, though we endeavoured it as much as we 
possibly could. This, incident several of our company 
interpreted as a bad omen of the place, which proved not so, 

447 



448 THE DUKE OF YORK'S ISLANDS 

through the providence of the Almighty, though many 
dangers were not wanting here to us, as I shall relate. 

We came to an anchor in the depth of 40 fathom, more 
or less, and yet at no greater distance than a stone' s-cast 
from shore. The water where we anchored was very smooth, 
and the high lands round about all covered with snow. Having 
considered the time of the year and all other circumstances, 
we resolved that, in case we could find a sufficient stock of 
provisions here, we would stay longer, that is until summer 
came or something more, before we prosecuted our intended 
voyage homewards through the Strait of Magellan ; which 
now we began to be careful how to find. That day of our 
anchoring in this bay we shot six or eight brave geese and 
some smaller fowl besides. Here we found also many hundreds 
of mussel-banks, all which were very plentifully rstocked 
with that kind of fish. We buried our dead man on the shore, 
giving him several volleys for his funeral rites, according to 
the custom. In the night of this day our anchor came home, 
so that we were forced to let go a-grappling to secure our- 
selves. But still every flaw of wind drove us. Hereupon we 
set our sprit-sail, and ran about a mile into another bay, 
where we let go another anchor, and thus anchored again. 
The first anchor, which was also the biggest in our ship, we 
lost by this accident, the cable being cut by the rocks. To 
these islands aforementioned our captain gave the name of 
His Royal Highness the Duke of York's Islands. 

Thursday, October 13th. This day we began to moor our 
ship, she driving as we easily could perceive with every flaw 
of wind that blew. The tide flows here full seven-feet up and 
down. We moored our vessel into a rocky point, being a 
quay, whereof there are many in the circumference of this 
bay. The ground of the bottom of the said bay we found 
was hard and sandy, being here and there rocky. This 
evening we brought on board great store of limpets, of which 
we made a kettle of broth, that contained more than all our 
company could eat. 

On Friday, October 14th we killed several geese, as also 
many of another sort of fowl like an eagle but having a bigger 
beak, with their nostrils rising from the top of the middle 
of their beak by a hand-trunk. This fowl lives on fish ; but 
we saw none. Yesterday in the evening there fell a great 



TEMPESTUOUS WEATHER 449 

sleet of snow on the hills round about the bay, but none 
where we were at anchor. Moreover, this day in the evening 
we caught hmpets in great quantity, being three times as 
nxany as we could eat. Our men, in ranging the quays for 
game, found grass plaited above a fathom long, and a knot 
tied at the end thereof. In like manner on other quays they 
found mussels and Umpet-shells. From these things we 
presently concluded that these countries were inhabited, 
and that some Indians or others were to be found hereabouts. 

Saturday, October 15th. Last night we had much rain, 
with large hailstones. About midnight the wind came to 
north with such great fury that the tree to which our cable 
was fastened on shore gave way and came up by the roots. 
All those gusts of wind were mixed with violent storms of 
rain and hail. Thus we fastened again to other trees. But 
here it happened that, our ship coming up to the shore, our 
rudder touched, and thereupon broke our goose-neck. Great 
was now our extremity, and greater it will be, if God send 
not better weather. Scarce a minute now passed without 
flaws of wind and rain. 

Sunday, October i6th. Last night was rainy, as before. 
About nine o'clock our biggest hawser gave way and broke. 
All this day likewise we had rain, with several showers of 
hail, and but Uttle wind to W. of N. 

Monday, October 17th. All last night, until five this 
morning, it ceased not to rain. Then until ten it snowed. 
On the hills it snowed all the night long. This day we hunted 
on the shore many tracks of people hereabouts, but could find 
none hitherto, they having fled and concealed themselves for 
fear of us, as we supposed. 

October i8th. In the past night we had much rain and 
hail. But the day was veiy clear. Hereupon we made an 
observation, which gave us lat. 50° 40' S. Moreover, this 
day we had pretty warm weather. 

October 19th. Both clear and frosty last night. This 
day was hazy, and somewhat windy from the north quarter. 
Every day we had plenty of limpets and mussels of a very 
large size. 

October 20 th. Last night was rainy, and this day windy, 
with very great gusts of wind at N.N.W. until the afternoon. 
Then we had wind at K.W., being very fresh and in gusts. 



450 THEY CAPTURE TWO INDIANS 

October 21st. All the past night was tempestuous, with 
huge gusts of wind and showers of hail. Yesterday in the 
evening we carried a cable ashore, and fastened it to a tree. 
This being done, at midnight our biggest cable broke in the 
middle. Towards morning we had much snow. In the day, 
great gusts of wind with large hailstones ; and also great 
plenty of limpets. 

October 22nd. Last night we had strange gusts of wind 
from N.W., together with much hail and rain. This day we 
killed a penguin ; and also began to carry water on board. 

October 23rd. All the last twenty-four hours we had 
much rain. The wind was but little at W. and W.S.W. 

October 24th. All this time until noon nothing but rain. 
At that time it held up fair for the space of half-an-hour, 
or thereabouts, and then it raintd again all the rest of the 
day. 

October 25th. All this while we had not one minute fair. 
Towards evening it held up from raining, but the weather 
was cloudy, and withal much warmer than when we came 
hither at first. 

Wednesday, October 26th. All the past night and this 
forenoon we had fair weather. But afternoon it rained again. 
We found cockles like those we have in England. 

Thursday, October 27th. Last night we had much rain, 
with very great gusts of wind, lasting for the whole space 
thereof. Yet, notwithstanding, this day proved to be the 
fairest that we ever had since we came into this place. In 
the evening of this day our canoe, which was gone to search 
the adjacent places for Indians or what else they could find, 
returned to the ship with a dory at her stern. They had 
gone, as it should seem, beyond the old bay where we first 
anchored, and thereabouts happened to meet with this 
dory. In it were three Indians, who, perceiving themselves 
near being taken, leaped overboard to make their escape. 
Our men in pursuing them unadvisedly shot one of them 
dead. A second, being a woman, escaped their hands. But 
the third, who was a lusty boy about eighteen years of age, 
was taken, and him they brought on board the ship. He was 
covered only with a seal's skin, having no other clothing 
about him. His eyes squinted, and his hair was cut pretty 
short. In the middle of the dory they had a file burning, 



THE INDIAN BOY 451 

either for dressing victuals or some other use. The dory 
itself was built sharp at both ends, and flat-bottomed. They 
had a net to catch penguins, and a club like our bandies, 
called by them a tomahawk. His language we could not 
understand, but he pointed up the lagoon, giving us to under- 
stand that there were more people thereabouts. This was 
confirmed by our men, who also said they had seen more. 
They had darts to throw against an enemy, pointed with 
wood. 

On the next day, being October 28th, in the evening our 
canoe went from the ship again to seek for more Indians. 
They went into several lagoons, and searched them narrowly. 
But they could find nothing but two or three huts, all the 
natives being fled before our arrival. In the evening they 
returned to the ship, bringing with them very large limpets, 
and also mussels which were six-inches-and-a-half long. 
Our Indian prisoner could open these mussels with his fingers, 
which our men could not so readily do with their knives. 
Both the night past and this day we had very fair weather. 

On the 29th we had in hke manner a very fair day, and 
also a smooth wind at S.S.E. Our Indian this day pointed 
to us that there were men in this country, or not far off from 
here, with great beards. He appeared to us by his actions 
to be very innocent and foolish. But by his carriage I was 
also persuaded that he was a man-eater. This day Ukewise 
we caught limpets enough to suffice us for the morrow. 

Sunday, October 30th. This day was fair, and there blew 
a small vS.S.E. wind. In the morning we sent a canoe over to 
the eastward shore, to seek either for provisions or Indians. 
I myself could not go as I desired, being, with two or three 
more, at that time very much tormented with the gripes. 
I am persuaded that this place where we now were is not so 
great an island as some hydrographers lay it down, but 
rather an archipelago of smaller islands. We saw this day 
many penguins, but they were so shy that we could not come 
near them. They paddle on the water with their wings very 
fast, but their bodies are too heavy to be carried by the said 
wings. The sun now made the weather very warm, insomuch 
that the snow melted apace. 

October 31st. Both last night and this day were very 
fair. At noon our canoe letumed from tlie Eastern shore, 



452 THE DUKE OF YORK^S ISLANDS 

bringing word that they had found several good bays and 
harbours, that were deep even close to the shore, only that 
there lay in them several sunken rocks, which we had also 
where we were. But these rocks are not dangerous to shipping, 
by reason that they have weeds which lie two fathoms in 
circumference about them. This morning blew a small wind 
at N.N.E. 

November ist. This day was also fair, and we had a small 
wind as before, at N.N.E. 

November 2nd. Last night I took the polar distance of 
the South star of the cock's foot, and found it to be 28° 25'. 
I observed also the two Magellan clouds, of which I made 
mention in this Journal before, and found them to be as 
follows, viz. the lesser 14° 05', and the greater 14° 25'. The 
morning of this day we hoisted on end our top-masts, and 
also brought too a main-top-sail and fore-sail, and finished 
our filling all the water we needed. At the same time the 
wind hung easterly : and I was still much tormented with 
the gripes ao before. 

November 3rd. This morning we hung our rudder, the 
greatest piece of work we had to do, after those violent 
storms above-mentioned. In the afternoon we hauled in 
our two biggest hawsers, and also our biggest cable from the 
shore. For the last three days we had a very great and 
dark fog between us and the Eastward shore. We had now 
very little wind in the cove where we were, but abroad at 
sea there blew at the same time a stiff gale at S.S.E. More- 
over, we could perceive now, the stormy weather being 
blown over, much small fry of fish about the ship, whereof 
we could see none, as was mentioned before. This day we 
had a very clear and calm evening. 

November 4th. Both all last night and this day we had 
very calm weather. And this morning a small breeze sprang 
up at N. and N.N.E., which afterwards wheeled about to 
S. and S.S.E. This morning we hoisted our main and fore- 
yards, and likewise fetched off from the shore our other 
hawser and cable, into eleven-fathom water. Our resolutions 
were now changed for a departure, in order to seek the mouth 
of the Strait of Magellan, seeing that we could not winter 
here for want of provisions, which we could not find either 
on the continent or about these islands aforementioned. 



THE DUKE OF YORK'S ISLANDS 453 

The weather now was very warm, or rather hot, and the bhds 
sung as sweetly as those in England. We saw here both 
thrushes and blackbirds, and many other sorts of those that 
are usually seen in our own country. 

Saturday, November 5th. This morning brought us a 
wind at N.N.E. hereupon : we warped to a rocky point, 
thereby to get out of the cove where we lay. For our anchor 
came home to us as we were carrying our warp out. At this 
time a second breeze came up very fresh in our stern, so that 
we took the opportunity thereof, and went away before it. 
By noon this day we hoisted in our canoes, and also turned 
away loose to the sea our Indian dory. As for the Indian 



.^^n^alfaf jsle/ 




boy whom we had taken in said dory we kept him still prisoner, 
and called him Orson. Our cove at our departure from this 
place looked thus, as I took then the description thereof. 
When we were come out into the channel, the weather grew 
dead calm — only now and then we had a small breeze, some- 
times from one quarter and then from another. By this 
slackness of wind we observed that the current hoisted us to 
the Southward. On the East side of this lagoon we per- 
ceived the Indians make a great smoke at our departure. 

We had a very fair day till six in the evening : when we 
got without the mouth of the gulf, it blew so hard that in 
an hour it forced us to hand our top-sails. Having now a 
fit gale at N.W. and N.N.W., we stood S.W. by W. to clear 
ourselves cf some breaks which lie four leagues from the 



454 THE DUKE OF YORK'S ISLANDS 

gulf's mouth at S. and S.S.E. Hereabouts we saw many 
reefs and rocks, which occasioned us to stand close-hauled. 
I have drawn here and given to my reader so much as I have 
seen of the gulf itself ; the rest must be completed in due 
time by them that have greater opportunities of making 
a farther search into it than I had at the time of our stay 
here under such tempestuous weather as I have described, 
and the distemper which hung upon me at the same time. 






Snow kilLs 




^ ^ icmafyBnjIifgulfe 
cj^Ma^aHa^urofraiants . 



'^^^^yu^ftj^as/ 



CHAPTER XXIV 

They depart from the English Gulf in quest of the Strait of 
Magellan, which they cannot find. They return home by 
an unknown way, never navigated before 

Sunday, November 6th. This morning we had lost the 
sight of land, so that we could see it no more. All the last 
night, and this day, we were under our two courses and 
sprit-sail. The weather this day was hazy. My reckoning 
was a S.W. half S. way, and by it 21 leagues. We had now 
an indifferently high sea, and a fresh wind at N.N.W. 

November 7th. Last night was both rainy and foggy ; 
but in the morning it cleared up. The wind for the most 
part was at W. and W.N.W. But at noon it came about at 
W.S.W. Our reckoning was a S.W. by S. way, and by it 
20 leagues. We found by observation lat. 52° 03'. We now 
steered away S.S.E., the wind being at that time at W.S.W. 
In the evening of this day I found a variation of the needle 
to N.E. to the number of 15° or better. I was still troubled 
with the gripes as I had been before. 

November 8th. Last night was fair. About midnight 
the wind came to N.N.W. At the break of day we all were 
persuaded that we had seen land, but at noon we saw that 
it was none, but only a cloud. The wind was now at N. 
My reckoning was a S.E. half-E. way, and 32 leagues and 
one-third. We had an observation that gave us 53° 27' S. 
The whole day was very fine and warm, and we saw great 
numbers of fowls and seals. 

November 9th. Yesterday in the evening the weather was 
cloudy. Hereupon we lay by under a main course. After 
midnight we sailed East, and E. by N., with a fresh wind at 
W.N.W. and not any great sea. The day itself was cloudy, 
and toward noon we had some rain. So at two in the after- 

455 



456 THEY SAIL FOR MAGELLAN STRAIT 

noon we lay by under a main course, the wind being fresh at 
N.W. I reckoned an E.N.E. way, and thereby 28 leagues. 

Thursday, November 10 th. All last night we lay under 
a main course, with a mere fret of wind at N.W. and N.N.W. 
Day being come, the wind rather increased, insomuch that 
about noon our sail blew to pieces. Hereupon we were forced 
to lower the yard and unbend the sail, lying for a little while 
under a mizzen. But that also soon gave way ; so that all 
the rest of this day we lay a hull in very dark weather, foggy 
and windy, with a huge sea, which oftentimes rolled over us. 
In the afternoon it seemed to abate for some space of time ; 
but soon after it blew worse than before, which compelled 
us to lower our fore-yard. 

November loth. All last night we had furious windy and 
tempestuous weather, from the points of N.W. and N.N.W., 
together with seas higher and higher. In the evening we set 
our mizzen : at which time the sun appeared very watery ; 
but the wind now abated by degrees, and the seas also. 

November 12th. This morning little wind was stirring, 
but only some rain fell. About ten it cleared up, by observa- 
tion lat. 55° 25'. The sea was now much fallen, and a fresh 
wind sprang up at W. and W.S.W. We experienced also a 
very great current to the S.W. In the afternoon of this day 
we set our sails again, resolving now unanimously to make 
for the Straits of St Vincent, otherwise called the Strait of 
Fernando de Magellan. We had a fresh wind at W.N.W., our 
course being S.S.E., under our sprit-sail, fore-sail, and fore- 
top-sail. This day we saw many fishes, or rather fowls, who 
had heads like Muscovy ducks, as also two feet like them. 
They had two fins like the foretins of turtles ; white breasts 
and bellies ; their beak and eyes being red. They are full 
of feathers on their bodies, and their hinder parts are like 
those of a seal ; wherewith they cut the water. The Spaniard 
calls these fowls paxaros ninos. They weigh most commonly 
about six or seven pounds, being about one-foot, a little more 
or less, in length. Our Commander, Captain Sharp, had so 
much dexterity as to strike two of them. In the evening 
we set also our mainsail, the wind now coming to S. of W. 

Sunday, November 13th. All last night we had a fresh 
wind between S.W. and W.N.W., with sometimes mists of 
small rain. In the evening we enjoyed a fine leading gale at 



THEY SAIL FOR MAGELLAN STRAIT 457 

W.N.W. together with both clear and wholesome weather. 
We made a S.E. way, and by' it 42 leagues and two-thirds. 
This day an observation gave us lat. 56° 55' S. We still 
experienced a great S.W. current. In the afternoon of this 
day we steered E.S.E., and in the evening had whiffling- 
winds. 

November 14th. Both last night and this morning we 
had cloudy weather. About eight it cleared up. My reckon- 
ing was a S.E. by E. way, and by it 32 leagues. Our observa- 
tion gave us lat. 57'' 50' S. This day we could perceive land, 
and at noon were due W. from it. In the evening we stood 
E. by S. 

November 15th. All the past night was very cloudy. 
We judged now that we should be close in with the land we 
had seen the day before, but the morning being come we 
could see none. In the night much snow fell, and in the day 
we had great sleets thereof, the weather being very cold and 
cloudy. I reckoned an E.S.E. way, and hereby 29 leagues 
and two-thirds ; moreover, that our lat. was 58° 25' S. The 
wind was now so fresh at N. that we were forced to lie under 
our two courses and sprit-sail. 

November i6th. Most of this time we had still rain and 
snow, but now no night at all, though the weather was dark. 
The wind was various, but from midnight before this day 
the wind was at S.E. and S.S.E. We now lay E.N.E. I 
reckoned a N.E. by E. way, and 23 leagues. About four in 
the afternoon two of our fore-shrouds' bolts broke, but were 
presently mended. This afternoon also we saw a very large 
whale. In the evening we handed in our fore-top-sail, and 
lay under our pair of courses and sprit-sail, the evening being 
very clear. 

November 17th. In the past night there was a very hard 
frost. At four this morning we saw two or three islands of 
ice at the distance of two or three leagues to the S. of us. 
Soon after this we saw several others, the biggest of them 
being at least 2 leagues round. By observation lat. 58° 23' S. 
We had now a vehement current to the S. At noon I saw 
many others of these islands of ice aforementioned, of which 
some were so long that we could scarce see the end of 
them, and extended about 10 or 12 fathom above-water. 
The weather in the meanwhile was very clear, and the 



458 QUEST FOR MAGELLAN STRAIT 

wind cold. I found variation of the needle i8 degrees to 
the N.E. 

November i8th. All last night was very fair. I must call 
it night, for otherwise it was not daik at all. The sea was 
very smooth, and the wind at N. and N.N.W. I reckoned 
a N.E. by N. way, and by the same 22 leagues. At ten it 
grew dead calm, which held all the afternoon of this day. 
But at night we had a wind again at N. and N. by E. 

November 19th. This day was cloudy with snow, and a 
frosty night preceding it. The wind now was so fresh at N. 
that we were forced to take in our topsails, and lie all day 
under our courses and sprit-sail. We made by an E.S.E. way 
18 leagues and two-thirds. 

November 20th. We had a cloudy night, together with 
mizzling rain and snow. This morning fell so great a fog 
that we could not see from stem to stern of our ship. From 
ten o'clock last night we had also calm and very cold weather. 
But, what was worse than all this, we were now kept to a very 
short allowance of our sorry victuals, our provisions growing 
very scanty with us. About ten this morning we had a very 
small breeze at N. Several of our men were not able to 
endure the cold, so fierce it was ; whereby they were forced 
to lie and keep themselves as close as they could. We made 
an E. way, and by the same 16 leagues. This day at noon I 
reckoned myself to be E. from the gulf, whence we last 
departed, 205 leagues and two-thirds. 

Monday, November 21st. Last evening we caught a small 
and white land-fowl, and saw two or three more ; and also 
this morning. This sight afforded us good hopes we were not 
far distant from some coast or other, yet none could we see 
in all this long and tedious voyage. In the night past we had 
a calm ; and all this morning a great fog with much snow 
and rain. We reckoned an E. by N. way, and 10 leagues. 
At one in the afternoon we had a fresh gale that sprang up 
at E., and at E. by N. 

November 22nd, Most part of this day was calm. In the 
meanwhile we could observe our ship to drive E. My reckon- 
ing was an E.N.E. way, and thereby 13 leagues and one-third. 
At one in the afternoon we had a small gale at W.S.W., our 
course being N.N.E. and N.E. by N. 

November 23rd. This day we had a gale at N.W. and 



QUEST FOR MAGELLAN STRAIT 459 

freshening still more and more ; so that we were forced to 
take in our top-sails and sprit-sail. The wind was not a 
settled gale, but often varied from point to point. At noon 
it came at N.E., and our course was then N.N.W. By a N. 
way we reckoned 16 leagues. 

November 24th. Both last night and this morning was 
foggy weather, with some calms between times. But at 
eight in the morning the sun broke out, though notwith- 
standing the day was not clear. By a N.N.E. way we 
reckoned 15 leagues. This morning the wind came about 
to E., and by noon it was again at N.E. We had a clear 
evening and a fresh gale. 

November 25th. All last night we had a fresh wind at 
E. and E.N.E., insomuch that at eight in the morning we 
took in our top-sails. But at noon the wind was not so fresh 
as it had been before. I reckoned a N.N.W. half W. way, 
and by the same 20 leagues. 

November 26th. Last night the wind was not altogether 
so fresh as before ; but this morning it was again very high. 
The weather was both dark and cloudy, and brought now 
and then rain and snow. We made a N.N.E. way, and 
hereby 30 leagues. The wind all along E. by S. and E.S.E. 
In the evening we had fair weather again. We experienced 
for the last ten days a great Western sea, and saw in the same 
time several seals. 

Sunday, November 27th. All the past night we enjoyed 
a fresh gale and clear weather. I reckoned 36 leagues by a 
N.E. by N. way. By observation lat. 52° 48' S. And I 
judged myself to be E. from the gulf 285 leagues. In the 
evening of this day. we had a very exact sight of the 
sun, and found above 30° variation of the needle ; whence 
ought to be concluded that it is very difficult to direct a course 
of navigation in these parts. For in the space of only 25 
leagues saihng we have experienced eight or nine degrees 
difference of variation, by a good Dutch azimuth compass. 

November 28th. All last night we had a fresh wind at 
E.S.E. Towards morning we had but httle wind, all the day 
being hazy weather. This day we saw a whole flight of land 
fowls, of which sort we killed one before, as was mentioned 
above. This sight ^ave us occasion to beheve that, neither 
then nor at this present, were we far distant from land, and 



46o QUEST FOR MAGELLAN STRAIT 

yet we descried none in the residue of this whole voyage. 
We made by a N.N.E. way 33 leagues. Yesterday in the 
evening we set a new sprit-sail, and about three this morning 
we also set our main-sail. At one in the afternoon the wind 
came about N.E. and N.N.E., which in the evening blew very 
fresh, with cloudy weather. 

November 29th. The night proved very cloudy, and the 
wind blew very fresh at E.N.E. and N.E. by E. This morning 
it was at E., with both snow and hail. Towards noon the 
weather cleared up, and we found by an observation taken 
lat. 49° 45' S. Our reckoning was a N. way, and 30 leagues. 
This day we had a short E. sea, and withal a very cold even- 
ing. I took the sun, and hereby I found variation 26° 30' 
to the N.E. This night the wind came about W. and W.N.W., 
continuing so all the night. 

November 30th. This day the wind was N. and N.N.E. , 
with some clouds hovering in the sky. At this time we had 
already almost four hours of night. The morning of this day 
was very fair and clear. Hereupon, to give myself satisfaction 
in the point, fearing the truth of Spanish books, I worked the 
true amplitude of the sun, and found his variation to be 
26° 25' to the N.E., being very comformable to what I had 
both read and experimented before. Hereabouts also we 
experienced a current to N. Moreover, this day we saw 
much rock-weed, which renewed our hopes once more of 
seeing land. We reckoned a N.E. way, and by the same 
twenty-two leagues. By an observation made we found 
lat. 48° 53' S. This day also we saw several of those fowl-fish 
afore described called paxaros ninos, and these of a larger 
size than any we had seen before. In the afternoon the wind 
came about at N.N.E. whereby we stood N.W. by W., with 
a fresh gale and smooth water. The weather now began to 
grow warmer than hitherto, and the evening of this day 
was clear. 

Tuesday, December ist. The latter part of last night was 
very cloudy, and also sometimes rainy. About midnight we 
had a furious and violent tornado, forcing us in a moment 
to hand in our top-sails. At five in the morning we set them 
again, and at eleven we had another tornado, forcing us to 
hand our top-sails the second time. We made a N.N.E. 
two-thirds E. way, and thereby 13 leagues and two-thirds. 



I 
I 



QUEST FOR MAGELLAN STRAIT 461 

The afternoon of this stormy day proved very fair, and the 
wind came to W.S.W., our course being N.E. by N. In the 
evening the wind freshened, with cloudy weather. 

December 2nd. Last night we experienced a very furious 
whirlwind, which, notwithstanding, it pleased God, did pass 
about the length of our ship to W. of us. However, we handed 
in our top-sails, and hauled up our low-sails, in the brails. 
After the whirlwind came a fresh storm of large hail-stones 
in the night, and several tornadoes ; but, God be thanked, 
they all came large of our ship. We now made great way 
under a fore-course and sprit-sail. At four o'clock this morning 
our fore-sail split, whereby we were forced to lower our 
fore-yard. At half-an-hour after ten we hoisted it again 
with a furious S.W. wind. We made a N.E. by E. way, and 
by the same 47 leagues and a-half. By observation we now 
had lat. 46° 54' S. We reefed our fore-sail in consequence of 
the violence of the wind. But in the evening this rather 
increased, and we had a very great sea. Our standing rigging, 
through the fury of this gale, gave way in several places, but 
was soon mended again. 

December 3rd. The wind all last night was very fresh, 
with several flaws both of wind and rain at S.W. and S.W. 
by S. We enjoyed now very warm weather. This morning 
we set our fore-top-sail. Our reckoning gave us a N.E. half E. 
way and 45 leagues. We found lat. by observation 45° 28' S. 
This day at noon a large shoal of young porpoises came about 
our ship, and played up and down. 

December 4th. All last night we had a fresh gale at 
W.S.W. The night was clear, only that now and then we had 
a small cloud affording some rain. In the morning from 
four o'clock till eight it rained ; but then it cleared up again, 
with a S.W. wind and a very smooth sea. We made by a 
N.E. one quarter N. way, 39 leagues. By observation we 
found lat. 44° 01' S. At noon the wind came to S.S.W., our 
course then being N.N.E. This day we agreed among our- 
selves, having the consent of our Commander, to share the 
eight chests of money, which as yet were remaining unshared. 
Yesterday in the evening we let out the reef of our fore-sail 
and hoisted up our fore-yard. This evening I found variation 
17° N.E. 

^londay, December 5th. All last night a clear night, and 



462 QUEST FOR MAGELLAN STRAIT 

this a fair day, with a fresh wind at S.S.W. We reckoned a 
N.E. 5° N. way, and by the same 42 leagues. An observation 
gave us lat. 42° 29' S. This afternoon we shared of the chests 
above-mentioned 300 pieces-of -eight each man. I now reckoned 
myself to be E. from my departure 471 leagues and one-third. 
At night again we shared 22 pieces-of-eight more to each. 

December 6th. We had a clear starlight night the last, 
and a fair morning this day, with a fresh gale at S.W. At 
noon we took in our fore-top-sail. We reckoned a N.E. 
half N. way, and heieby 50 leagues and two-thirds. An 
observation taken afforded us 40° 31' S. This evening was 
cloudy. 

December 7th. The night was both windy and cloudy. 
At one in the morning we took in our top-sails, and at three 
handed our sprit-sail, and so we scudded away before the vvdnd, 
which now was very fresh at West. This morning a gust of 
wind came and tore our main-sail into a hundred pieces, 
which made us put away before the wind till we could provide 
for that accident. My reckoning was a N.E. three-quaiters 
E. way, and by the same 33 leagues. By observation we 
found lat. 39° 37' S. We had now a great sea, and a fresh 
wind. At three in the afternoon we set another fore-sail, the 
first being blown to pieces. Moreover, at the same time, we 
furled our sprit-sail. At five the wind came at W.S.W. with 
very bad weather. This day our worthy Commander, 
Captain Sharp, had very certain inteUigence given him that 
on Christmas Day, which was now at hand, the company, or 
at least a great part thereof, had a design to shoot him ; he 
having appointed that day some time since to be meTry. 
Hereupon he made us share the wine amongst us, being 
persuaded they would scarce attempt any such thing in their 
sobriety. The wine we shared fell out to three jars to each 
mess. That night the wind increased. 

December 8th. Last night was both cloudy and windy, 
the wind often varying between N.W. and S.W. This morning 
it varied between W. and N.W. by W. About noon this day 
we brought a new main-sail to the yard, but did not set it 
then because there blew too much wind. I reckoned a N.E. 
half-N. way, and by the same 30 leagues. By observation 
lat. 38° 29' S. In the afternoon we had one or two squalls 
of wind and rain : but the violence of both fell astern of us. 



QUEST FOR MAGELLAN STRAIT 463 

In the evening it blew again very hard. I observed this day 
the rising and setting of the sun, and found the exact variation 
to be 12° 15' N.E. 

December 9th. The night was starry, but withal very 
windy. About the bieak of day the wind came to NAV., and 
at seven we set our fore-top-sail, and stood N.N.E., with not 
much wind. We made since our last reckoning a N.PI. 
quarter-E. way, and 29 leagues. We found by observation 
lat. 37^ 30' S. The sea was much fallen, but our ship now 
began to complain of several leaks, through our tedious and 
long voyage. This afternoon we hoisted up our main-yard 
and set up back-stays and main-swifter, whose ring-bolt gave 
way, but was mended. In the evening of this day we had 
but little wind. 

December loth. The night was very clear, but till ten 
o'clock this forenoon we had no wind. Then a small breeze 
sprang up at N. and N. by E. We made an E.N.E. one-third 
N. way, and hereby 21 leagues. An observation gave us 
lat. 37° oi' S. In the afternoon of this day our chief surgeon 
cut off the foot of a negro-boy, which was perished with cold. 
Now it was Uke to be bad weather again. Hereupon we 
furled our top-sails, end lay under a pair of courses. But in 
the evening we lay under a fore-sail and mizzen, with misty 
weather. 

Sunday, December nth. All last night we had a fresh 
wind at N. and sometimes at N.N.W. The weather was very 
cloudy with drizzUng rain. We made an E. way, and thereby 
25 leagues. This day brought a great sea. About ten in the 
morning one of our main-shrouds gave way. In the evening 
fell some small rain. 

December 12th. All last night we had misty rain and but 
little wind — yea, in the morning a perfect calm. At noon 
came up a small gale at E.S.E. and S.E., biinging with it 
cloudy weather. We reckoned a N.E. by E. way, and by the 
same 18 leagues. Yesterday died the negro-bc^y whose kg 
was cut off by our surgeon, as was mentioned the day before. 
This afternoon also died another ntgro, somewhat bigger than 
the former, named Chepillo. The boy's name was Beafero. 
All this evening but small wind.* 

December 13th. All night the wind was at E.S.E. , our 
course being N.N.E. At three in the morning it came about 



464 QUEST FOR MAGELLAN STRAIT 

at S.S.W. and at nine at E. by N. I reckoned a N.E. by N. 
way, and 15 leagues. The weather was hazy. In the after- 
noon the wind was at N.E. our course being N.N.W. We 
enjoyed now a very smooth sea, and saw multitudes of 
grampuses, whales, and porpoises every day as we sailed 
along. 

December 14th. Last evening was cloudy ; as also the 
night foggy. Hereupon we took in our top-sails. At half-an- 
hour-after-three this morning, we stood N.E., the wind being 
then at N.N.W. At five we put out our top-sails again. 
At seven of the morning we saw a turtle floating upon the 
sea. We reckoned a N.N.E. way. This day's observation 
afforded us 34° 32 S'. At this time we had very hot weather, 
and great dews in the night. My whole easting I reckoned 
to be now 675 leagues and one-third. 

December 15th. Last night was fine with a great dew. 
The wind in the interim was between N. and N.W. I 
reckoned a N.E. half E. way, and by the same 31 leagues. 
We had an observation that gave us lat. 33° 46' S. At noon 
the wind came about at N.N.W., our course being N.E. We 
had this day a very clear evening, and at the same time a 
fresh wind. 

December i6th. We had a fair night and wind at N.N.W. 
and N.W. by N. This morning I took the sun at its rising, 
and found N.E. variation 20° 30'. My reckoning was a 
N.N.E. way, and 36 leagues and one-third. By observation 
I found lat. 32° 09' S. At noon this day the wind came about 
to N.W. 

December 17th. Most part of last night the wind was at 
N.W. as before. But towards morning a fine and easy gale 
sprang up at W.N.W. This morning we saw several dolphins 
playing upon the sea, which made us hope they would at last 
befriend us and suddenly show us some land or other. We 
reckoned a N.E. by N. one-third N. way, and by the same 
25 leagues. An observation gave us lat. 31° 04'. A fair 
evening. 

December i8th. We had a clear night, together with a 
smooth gale at N.W., which this morning was at W. by S. 
We had now a smooth sea for several days past. Our reckon- 
ing was 25 leagues, by a N.E. by N. way. By observation 
we perceived lat. 29° 48' S. 



QUEST FOR MAGELLAN STRAIT 465 

December 19th. A clear night and a fresh breeze at S.S.W. 
and S.W. by E., lasting until nine in the morning. Then 
sprang up a wind at S.E. by E. I reckoned this day a N.N.E. 
half E. way, and upon the same 30 leagues. By observation, 
lat. 28° 29' S. The day was very fair, and a smooth sea, with 
weather that was very hot. My whole easting I reckoned 
now to be 760 leagues. This evening I found variation 
02° 50' N.E. 



CHAPTER XXV 

The Buccaneers continue their navigation, without seeing any 
land, till they arrive at the Caribbean Islands in the West 
Indies. They give away their ship to some of their com- 
panions that were poor, and disperse for several countries. 
The author of this Journal arrives in England 

December 20th, 1681. The night before this day was some- 
what cloudy, but the weather was fair and the wind but 
little. At noon the wind came about N. by E., our course 
being W.N.W. We made a N.N.W. way, and thereby as I 
reckoned 22 leagues. By an observation made we took 
lat. 27° 25' S. The evening of this day was cloudy, and now 
and then there fell a shower of rain. 

December 21st. At eight o'clock last night the wind came 
N.W. by N., but with such dark weather that we were forced 
to take in our top-sails. The night was somewhat rainy, 
and the weather this morning calm and rainy. About ten we 
had a small breeze at N.W. We reckoned a N. by E. way, 
and by the same 16 leagues. The afternoon of this day was 
calm and still. 

December 22nd. We had a fair and clear night which 
produced this day a smooth sea and extremely hot weather, 
and very little wind near the sun ; so that no observation 
was made. 

December 23rd. The night was very fair. At midnight, 
or thereabouts, a fresh gale sprang up at S.E. and E.S.E., 
which sometime was E. This freshened by degrees. We 
had in the day very hot and clear weather. By a N. way I 
reckoned 15 leagues. 

December 24th. Last night we had both a fresh gale 
and a clear night. The wind was at E. by S. We reckoned 
a N.E. by E. way, and by it 31 leagues. 

466 



THEY CONTINUE THEIR VOYAGE 467 

Sunday, December 25th. This day being Christmas day, 
for celebration of that great festival we killed yesterday in 
the evening a sow. This sow we had brought from the Gulf 
of Nicoya, being then a sucking-pig of three weeks old, more 
or less, but now weighed about fourscorc-and-ten pounds. 
With this hog's flesh we made our Christmas dinner, being 
the only flesh we had eaten ever since we turned away our 
prizes under the equinoctial and left the island of Plata. 
We had this day several flaws of wind and some rain, but the 
weather otherwise was pretty clear. I reckoned a N. by E. 
way, and 33 leagues by the same. It was now also extremely 
hot weather, as we signified before. 

December 26th. We had this day several gusts of wind, 
which forced us to stand by our top-sails. Yet were they 
but very short, and all the rest of the while we enjoyed an 
indifferent fresh gale at E. and E. by S. We reckoned a N. 
by E. way, and 28 leagues. 

December 27th. We had fair weather, and a fresh wind 
at E. and E. by S. I reckoned a N. by E. way, and upon the 
same 32 leagues. The evening of this day was cloudy. 

December 28th. Last night was cloudy, with a fresh wind. 
We reckoned a N.E. way, and by the same 46 leagues. We 
found by observation lat. 15° 30' S. My whole easting I 
reckoned this day to be 825 leagues. Now we saw much 
flying fish, with some dolphins, bonitos, and albicores ; but 
they will not take the hook. 

December 29th. All last night was cloudy, with a fresh 
wind between E. and E.S.E. The weather all the afternoon 
was hazy. I reckoned a N. by E. way, and hereupon 40 
leagues and one-third. In the afternoon we had a S.E. by 
E. wind, which blew very fresh. The evening was clear. 
At sunset I found variation to N.W. 04° 19'. 

December 30th. Last night was cloudy. Towards morning 
the wind came about at E. At six it came E.S.E., and at 
ten to S.E. by S. We made a N. by E. way, and 43 leagues. 
By observation lat. 11° 03' S. The evening of this day was 
clear. 

December 31st. We had a cloudy night, but the morning 
was hazy. We came now to a strict allowance of only three 
good pints of water each day. We made a N. by E. way, lat. 
by observation 08° 55' S. In the afternoon we had an E.S.E. 



468 THEY CONTINUE THEIR VOYAGE 

and S.E. by E. wind. My whole easting I reckoned now to be 
884 leagues and one-third. At noon we stood away N.W. 

Sunday, January ist, 1682. All last night was cloudy, 
as this day also, with some showers of rain. We made a 
N.W. one-eighth N. way, and 40 leagues. In the afternoon 
came about a fresh wind at S.E. and E.S.E. 

January 2nd. The weather this day was both dull and 
cloudy. We reckoned a N.W. one-quarter N. way, and by 
the same 32 leagues. By observation lat. 06° 06' S. The 
wind came pretty fresh at S.E. 

January 3rd. We had several squalls of wind, and some 
rain. But withal a fresh wind at S.E. and E.S.E. Our 
reckoning was a N.W. one-quarter N. way, and 34 leagues. 
The afternoon was clear, but the evening cloudy. 

January 4th. All last night was very cloudy, but this 
forenoon it cleared up. Yesterday we put abroad our main- 
top-sail studding-sails ; but took them in at night. At 
four this morning we set our larboard studding-sail, and 
before noon fitted up top-gallant masts and yards. We 
made a N.W. way, and by it 40 leagues and two-thirds. 
By observation, lat. 03° 09' S. This afternoon also we set 
our top-gallant sail, being forced to make out all its running 
rigging. The wind was pretty fresh at S.E. and S.E. by E. 

January 5th. Most part of the past night was clear and 
starlight, though with some rain towards the morning. This 
being come, we put out our top-gallant sail, and both our 
top-sail studding-sails. At noon Ukewise we put up our 
fore-top-gallant mast and yard. We caught an albicore this 
day, weighing about 120 pounds. The wind was at S.E. by 
S. and S.S.E. We made a N.W. way, and reckoned thereby 
35 leagues. By observation, lat. 02° 03' S. We had now 
mighty hot weather. 

January 6th. Yesterday in the evening we caught another 
albicore, which weighed only eight or nine pounds. We 
made a N.W. way, and reckoned 35 leagues as before. By 
observation, lat. 00° 49' S. The evening of this day was very 
clear. 

January 7th. The wind was variable between S.S.E. and 
S.S.W., though not altogether so fresh as before. Our reckon- 
ing was a N.W. one-quarter N. way, and 36 leagues by the 
same. This day an observation gave us lat. 00° 32' N. of 



THEY CONTINUE THEIR VOYAGE 469 

the equinoctial, which now we had passed again. In the 
afternoon of this day we caught another albicore, which 
weighed more than the first we took, that is between 135 and 
140 pounds. But Httle wind stirring this afternoon. 

January 8th. Last evening we had httle better than a 
calm. At nine this morning we had a fresh wind at S.S.E. 
with dark weather, so that we thought it convenient to take 
in our main-topsail. But at noon we set it again, and also 
our larboard top-studding-sail, with both top-gallant sails. 
We made a N.W. way, and by it 34 leagues. By observation 
lat. 01° 55' N. We had now extremely hot weather, and a 
very small allowance of water. 

January 9th. Last night we took in top-sails all night, the 
wind then whiffling between S. and W. We had notwith- 
standing for the most part very little wind. The morning 
of this day was rainy, and thereupon with good diligence we 
saved a bumpkin of water ^. There was now a great rippUng 
sea, rising very high ; and it is reported that sometimes and 
somewhere hereabouts is to be seen an enchanted island, 
which others say, and dare assert, that they have sailed over. 
I reckoned a N.W. by N. one-quarter N. way, and 25 leagues. 
This afternoon we had very dark and calm weather, looking 
as if we should have much rain. Now, reckoning up my 
meridian, I found myself E. from my departure 702 leagues. 
In the evening we had very rainy weather and a cockHng sea. 

January 10 th. All last night was cloudy. About mid- 
night sprang up a small breeze varying all round the compass. 
At five this morning we had a breeze at S.E. and a very clear 
sky, which afterwards continued to freshen, with the same 
clearness as before. We made a N.W. by N. one-quarter N. 
way, and by the same 2 leagues and two-thirds. By clear 
observation lat. 03° 16' N. At four this evening the wind 
was at E.S.E., the weather being violent hot, insomuch that 
our allowance of water was tedious to us for its shortness. 
At the same time we had an indifferent smooth sea from the E. 

January nth. All last night we had Httle or no wind. 
But about two in the morning the wind freshened again at 

* A nautical term for a vessel for carrying water : here, used for the 
amount it would hold. Cf. Dampier, Voyages (1697), ed. 1729, i, 2: 
" Another canoa which had been sawn asunder in the middle, in order 
to have made bumkins, or vessels for carrying water." 



470 THEY CONTINUE THEIR VOYAGE 

E.N.E., and brought both a clear and hot day. We made 
23 leagues by a N.W. one-quarter W. way. This day's 
observation gave us lat. 04° 06' N. In the afternoon we had 
a shower of rain, and afterwards a fresh wind at E.N.E, 
But the evening grew dull. 

January 12th. Last night we had two or three squalls of 
wind and some showers of rain. In the meanwhile the wind 
blew fresh at N.E. and N.E. by E., as it also continued to 
do in the day. I reckoned a N.W. way, and 44 leagues and 
one-third. Our observation this day gave us 05° 49' N. 
Yesterday and to-day we set our main-top-sail. Now I 
could not find much variation of the needle. 

January 13th. We had a fresh gale all last night, but 
more northerly than before, for now it was N.E. by N. We 
reckoned a W.N.W. way. An observation showed lat. 06° 41' 
N. We had a N.N.E. sea and very clear weather. 

January 14th. We had a clear night, and a fresh wind at 
E.N.E. We made a N.W. one-fifth W. way, and 38 leagues. 
By observation lat. 07° 46' N. We had a smooth sea ; and 
now we were come to only three horns of water a day, which 
made in all but a quart allowance for each man. The evening 
was clear, and we had a fresh wind. 

Sunday, January 15th. Last night was clear, and the 
wind fresh at E.N.E., and again at N.E. by E. very fresh. 
At about eleven o'clock at night there died one of our com- 
panions, named WiUiam Stephens. It was commonly believed 
that he poisoned himself with manQanilla in Golfo Dulce, 
for he never had been in health since that time. This fore- 
noon was cloudy. We reckoned 44 leagues and a N.W. way. 
An observation gave us this day 09° 18' N. All last night 
we kept out our top-gallant sails. We saw hereabouts many 
flying fish, being very large in size. This morning also we 
threw overboard our dead man, and gave him two French 
volleys and one English one. I found now again very small 
variation. 

January i6th. We had a clear night and a very fresh 
wind at N.E. and E.N.E., with a long, homing sea. My 
reckoning was a N.W. one-seventh W. way, and thereby 
48 leagues and one-third. The observation made this day 
gave us lat. 10° 48' N. I reckoned myself now E. from my 
departure 553 leagues, We had a very cloudy evening. 



THEY CONTINUE THEIR VOYAGE 471 

January 17th. All last night we enjoyed a fresh wind, 
and so this day also, at N.E. by N. We made a N.W. half 
W. way, and thereupon 47 leagues and one-third. By observa- 
tion we found lat. 12° 19' N. We had now a long north sea. 
At noon this day we steered away N.N.W. The day was 
very hot, but the night both cool and dewy. 

January i8th. All last night was both cloudy and windy. 
At six this morning our sprit-sail top-mast broke. I reckoned 
a W.N.W. way, and 48 leagues by the same. We found by 
observation, lat. 13° 12' N. At noon we steered away W., the 
wind being at N.E. fresh, with a clear evening. 

January 19th. We had a clear night and a fresh wind 
at E.N.E., which sometimes came in pushes. Our reckoning 
was a W. half S. way, and by the same 46 leagues. We found 
by observation lat. 13° 01' N. Yesterday in the evening we 
put up a new sprit-sail top-mast ; with a fine, smooth gale 
at N.E. by E. 

January 20th. Last night was clear, and not very fresh, 
but at daybreak it freshened again. Last night we saw a 
great shoal of fish, whereof we caught none, by reason the 
porpoises frightened them from us, as they ofttimes had 
done before. Yesterday in the evening also we saw a man-of- 
war fowU, and that gave us good hopes we should e'er long 
see land. These hopes, and the great desires we had to end 
our voyage, gave us occasion this day to put in, or stake 
down, each man of our company a piece-of-eight for a reward 
to him that should first discover land. We reckoned a W. 
one-sixth N. way, and by it 38 leagues. An observation gave 
us this day lat. 13° 11' N. The wind was at N.E. and E.N.E. 
This day we passed over many ripphngs, and also saw many 
multitudes of fish ; but the porpoises did always hinder us 
from having any good of them. 

January 21st. We made a W. way, and reckoned 47 
leagues. By observation we found lat. 13° 07' N. The wind 
at E.N.E. ; thence came a long sea. The evening very clear. 

January 22nd. We had a fair and a clear day, the wind 
being at E. We reckoned a W. by N. one-third W. way 
and 40 leagues. An observation showed us lat. 13° 17' N. 
We had a clear evening, and a fresh wind at E.N.E. 

January 23rd. This day was both clear and hot, with a 
1 The frigate-bird ; also called the sea-hawk. 



472 THEY SIGHT LAND 

fresh wind at E.N.E. My reckoning was a W. way, and 46 
leagues. Our observation this day afforded us lat. 13° 15' N. 
In the evening we had some rain. 

January 24th. This day brought us Ukewise clear weather, 
such as the day before. I reckoned a W. way, and 40 leagues 
and one-third. By observation we found lat. 13° 12' N. The 
afternoon was cloudy, and had some rain, the wind freshening 
at E.N.E. and at E. by N. I reckoned now that I was E. 
from my departure 311 leagues. We had a cloudy evening. 

January 25th. Both last night and this morning the 
weather was cloudy. This morning we saw several tropical 
birds of divers sorts. Our reckoning was a W. three-quarters 
N. way, and 43 leagues. We found by observation lat. 13° 29' 
N. This afternoon we saw a booby ^ flying close aboard the 
horizon. The weather was hazy. But now we began to 
look out sharp on all sides for land, expecting to see it every 
minute. I reckoned myself to be E. of my departure 268 
leagues. 

January 26th. Last night was indifferent clear. Yet, 
notwithstanding, this morning we had a smart shower of 
rain, and it was very windy. Hereupon we furled our sprit- 
sail, the weather being very hazy to W. We reckoned a W. 
way, and thereby 46 leagues and one-third. By observation, 
lat. 13° 17' N. At noon this day we had a very fierce tornado 
and rain together, but a clear afternoon. We had a high 
E.N.E. sea, and saw multitudes of flying -fish, and amongst 
these two or three boobies. The evening was hazy. 

January 27th. All last night we had a fresh wind, and 
clear weather. This morning our fore-top-mast backstay 
gave way, and at daybreak the star-board sheet of our fore- 
top-sail broke. We had several tornadoes this day, and 
dark weather. Our reckoning was a W. way, and 48 leagues 
by the same. We had a clear evening and a dark night. 
This day also a certain bird called, a noddy 2, came on board 
us, which we took for a certain token that we were not now 
very far from land. 

Saturday, January 28th. We had a very clear night. 
About an hour before day one of our company happened to 
descry land, which proved to be the Island of Barbados, 

^ The brown gannet, sula cyanops. 
* The tern, sterna stolida. 



LIBERATION OF THEIR NEGRO 473 

at S.S.W. from us, and at 2 leagues and a-half distance, 
more or less. Hereupon we clapped on a wind, N. and by W. 
At daybreak we were only 4 leagues distant from Chalky 
Mount, at which time we stood S.W. by S. As we sailed 
we saw several ships at anchor in Spikes Road. Soon after 
a shallop passed by, between us and the shore, but would 
not come within call of us. Hereupon we stood in, within 
a mile of the shore, and made a wiff to a pinnace which we 
saw coming out of the road aforementioned. She came close 
aboard us, and, as it should seem, was the barge of one of 
his Majesty's frigates, the Richmond, then lying at the Bridge- 
town at anchor. They told us of peace at home, but would 
not come on board us, though often invited thereto. Neither 
dared we be so bold as to put in there at Barbados, for, hearing 
of a frigate lying there, we feared lest the said frigate should 
seize us for privateers and for having acted in all our voyage 
without commission. Thus we stood away thence for the 
island of Antigua. 

Here I cannot easily express the infinite joy we were 
possessed with this day to see our own countrymen again. 
They told us that a ship which we saw in the offing to leeward 
of the island was a Bristol-man, and an interloper ; but we 
feared that same vessel to be the frigate aforementioned. I 
reckoned a way of 25 leagues, so that I was now by my account 
to eastward of my departure 150 leagues. Now we stood N. 
by W., and by observation found lat. 13° 17' N., we being then 
N.W. from the body of the island of Barbados between 7 and 
8 leagues. This afternoon we freed the negro who was our 
shoemaker by trade, giving him his liberty for the good 
service he had done us in all the course of this voyage. We 
gave also to our good Commander, Captain Sharp, a mulatto- 
boy, as a free gift of the whole company, to wait upon him, 
in token of the respect we all were owing to him for the 
safety of our conduct through so many dangerous adventures. 
This being done, we shared some small parcels of money 
that had not as yet been touched of our former prizes ; and 
this dividend amounted to 24 pieces-of-eight each man. 

At one o'clock this day from our fore-yard we descried 
the island of St Lucia, being one of the Western Islands, 
not far distant from that of Barbados. I had omitted to tell 
a passage which happened in our ship on Thursday last, 



474 THEY REACH CARIBBEAN ISLANDS 

which was the 26th day of this month and just two days 
before we made the island of Barbados. On that day, there- 
fore, a Httle Spanish shock-dog 1, which we had found in our 
last wine-prize taken under the equinoctial and had kept 
aUve till now, was sold at the mast by public cry for 40 pieces- 
of-eight, his owner saying that all he could get for him should 
be spent upon the company at a pubUc merriment. Our 
Commander, Captain Sharp, bought the dog, with intention 
to eat him, in case we did not see land very soon. This 
money, therefore, with 100 pieces-of-eight more, which our 
boatswain, carpenter, and quartermaster had refused to take 
at this last dividend, for some quarrel they had against the 
sharers thereof, was all laid up in store till we came to land, 
with the intent of spending it ashore at a common feast or 
drinking-bout. At sunset the island of St Lucia bore W.S.W. 
from us, and was at 10 leagues distance. Also the island of 
Martinique bore N.W. by W. of us at 12 or 13 leagues distance. 
We had this day a very clear evening, 

Sunday, January 29th. We had a clear night, and a fresh 
wind at E. by N. and at E.N.E. Our reckoning was a N.N.W. 
half-W. way, and hereby 46 leagues. By observation we took 
lat. 15° 46' N. At noon this day we saw the island named 
La Desirade, or The Desired Island, which then bore N.W. 
from us, and seemed to be at 8 leagues distance, more or less. 
At six o'clock in the evening we saw likewise Mariegalante, 
another of the Caribbee Islands, at S.W. by W. from us, and 
that of Guadaloupe, streaking itself in several hummocks of 
land, both W. and N. ; as also La Desirade above-mentioned 
at S.E., which from there shows like tableland, and at each 
end has a low point running out. At six this evening it was 
W.S.W., and at 5 or 6 leagues distance from us. At the 
same time we saw the island of Montserrat at a great distance 
from our ship and making three round hummocks close 
together. This evening Hkewise we caught an albicore of 
twenty pound weight. 

Monday, January 30th. We had a fair night all the last 
past, and a fresh wind. Hereupon all night we hauled up 
our main-sail in brails, standing at the same time N. by W., 

^ A small rough-coated dog : cf. " What a terrible bandog [bound- 
dog ; for fierceness] do's she make of it, | Which other ladies play with as 
familiarly | As with their shocks or Bononia dogs." — Erminia [1661]. 



DISPERSAL OF THE BUCCANEERS 475 

with the wind at E.N.K. At midnight we stood N.W. At 
three in the morning we lay by until five. Then we stood 
away W.N.W. until six, and at that hour we stood W. At 
eight o'clock we saw the island of Antigua, called by us 
Antego, to the S. of us, making three round hummocks of 
land, and a long high hill to N. Hereupon we stood W.S.W. 
for it. At noon we found lat. 17° N., the island being then 
just W. from us. 

We came about to the S. of the island, and sent a canoe 
on shore to get tobacco and other necessaries that we wanted, 
as also to ask leave of the Governor to come into the port. 
The gentry of the place and common people were very willing 
and desirous to receive us. But on Wednesday, February ist, 
the Governor flatly denied us entry — at which all the gentry 
were much grieved, and showed themselves very kind to us. 
Hereupon we agreed among ourselves to give away and 
leave the ship to them of our company who had no money 
left of all their purchase in this voyage, having lost it all at 
play ; and then to divide ourselves into two ships, which 
were now bound for England. Thus I myself and thirteen 
more of our company went on board Captain Robert Porteen's 
ship, called the Lisbon Merchant, and set sail from Antigua on 
February nth, and landed at Dartmouth in England, March 
26th, anno 1682, 

TO THE PRECIOUS MEMORY OF 

BEATRICE BYERLY, 

WHO ESCAPED PONTIAC'S CONFEDERATES AND BORE HER TENDER 
BABES THROUGH THE WILDERNESS FROM BUSHY RUN TO FORT 
LIGONIER, IN 1763; WHO ORGANIZED AND CONDUCTED A SUN- 
DAY SCHOOL AT FORT WALTHOUR. IN WESTMORELAND COUNTY, 
PENNSYLVANIA, DURING THE DARK AND DANGEROUS DAYS OF 
THE REVOLUTION, AND WHO WAS A BLESSING TO HUNDREDS OF 
PIONEER SETTLERS BY HER DEEDS OF CHRISTIAN CHARITY AND 
PATRIOTIC DEVOTION DURING A LONG AND EVENTFUL LIFE ON 
THE FRONTIERS, THIS LITTLE VOLUME IS DEDICATED BY ONE 
OF HER GRATEFUL DESCENDANTS. 

THOUGH HEAVEN ALONE RECORDS THE TEAR, 
AND FAME SHALL NEVER KNOW HER STORY, 
HER HEART HAS SHED A DROP AS DEAR 
AS E'ER BEDEWED THE FIELD OF GLORY." 




COL HENRY BOUQUET 



HIS CAMPAIGNS OF 1763 AND 1764. 



Fort Pitt, May 29, 1763. 

Sir. — A large party of Mingoes arrived at the beginning of 
the month and gave up to us ten horses of poor quality. They 
asked me for presents, but I refused everything they had to offer 
except eight inerits of Indian corn, ( i. e.: 24 bushels, C. C, ) 
which they planted opposite Crogans' house, where they have 
built a town. In the evening of the day before yesterday, Mr. 
McKee reported to me that the Mingoes and Delawares were in 
motion, and had sold in a great hurry skins to the value of ^300., 
with which they bought as much powder and lead as they pleased. 
Yesterday I sent him to their towns to get information, but he 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 2$ 

found them entirely abandoned, and followed their trail and si 
certain that they have gone down the river, which makes me 
think that they want to interrupt our boats and close the passage 
against us. They stole three horses and a cask of rum at Bushy 
Run. They even robbed a man named Coleman of £^o, ( on 
the Bedford road, ) holding their guns against his body. I am 
assured that the famous Wolfe and Butler were the chiefs ; it is 
clear that they want to break with us. I pity the poor people on 
the communication. I am at work to put this post in the best 
position possible with the few people I have. Just as I was finish- 
ing my letter, three men came from Clapham's with the melan- 
choly news that yesterday, at three o'clock in the afternoon, the 
Indians murdered Clapham and everybody in his house. These 
three men were at work outside and escaped through the woods. 
I gave them arms and sent them to aid our people at Bushy Run. 
The Indians have told Byerly ( at Bushy Run ) to leave his house 
within four days, or he and all his family would be murdered. I 
tremble for the small posts. As for this one, I will answer for it. 

S. ECUYER. 

If you do not often get letters from me, it will be a proof that 
the communication is cut. 
To Colottel Bouquet. 

From this time until the tenth of August, the garrison 
was cooped up in the fort, and communications cut off. 

THE FLIGHT OF THE BYERLYS TO FORT LIGONIER. 

Tet US take another look at Bushy Run before we dwell 
upon the siege of Fort Pitt. 

As Ecuyer states, Byerly had received warning, but his 
family was in no condition to be moved. Mrs. Byerly 
had just been confined and the departure was delayed as 
long as possible, indeed until certain death was imminent 
if the flight should be any longer postponed. Byerly had 
gone with a small party (perhaps Clapham's men referred 
to above) to bury some persons who had been killed at 
some distance from his station. A friendly Indian who 
had often received a bowl of milk and bread from Mrs. 
Byerly came to the house after dark and informed the 
family that they would all be killed if they did not make 
their escape before daylight. Mrs. Byerly got up from 
her sick couch and wrote the tidings on the door of the 



24 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

house for the information of her husband when he should 
return. A horse was saddled on which the mother with 
her tender babe three days old in her arms was placed, and 
a child not two years old was fastened behind her. 

Michael Byerly was a good sized lad, but Jacob was 
only three years old and had a painful stone bruise on one 
of his feet. With the aid of his older brother who held 
him by the hand and sometimes carried him on his back, 
the little fellow, however, managed to make good time 
through the wilderness to Fort Ligonier about thirty miles 
distant. But although he reached his ninety-ninth year 
he never forgot that race for life in his childhood, nor did 
he feel like giving quarters to hostile Indians, one of whom 
he. killed on an island in the Alleghany in a fight under 
Lieutenant Hardin in 1779, although the savage begged 
for quarters. 

Milk cows were highly prized by frontier families in 
those days, and the Byerly family made a desperate effort 
to coax and drive their small herd along to Fort Ligonier. 
But the howling savages got so close that they were 
obliged to leave the cattle in the woods to be destroyed 
by the Indians. Byerly in some way eluded the Indians and 
joined his family in the retreat. They barely escaped 
with their lives. The first night they spent in the stock- 
ade, and in the morning the bullets of the pursuers struck 
the gates as the family pressed into the fort. Here they 
were compelled to remain two months, exposed to great 
privations and repeated assaults of Indians. Fort Pitt 
would have been nearer and preferable as a place of safety 
had it been possible to reach it. As it was they had to 
choose the longer road and the weaker fort as the only 
chance of escape from the red demons. At Fort Pitt 
Capt. Ecuyer put everything in the best possible shape for 
defence. The garrison consisted of 330 soldier, traders 
and backwoodsmen, who were armed and drilled for the 
emergency. There were also about one hundred women 
in the fort and a still greater number of children. 

**A hospital was constructed under the drawbridge, out 
of range of musket shot, for patients suffering from small- 
pox, and tlie captain was very apprehensive that disease 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 25 

would break out in epidemic form as a result of the over- 
crowded condition of the fort. He seemed to have no 
fear of losing the fort. A letter, written at the time, 
says, " we are in such a good posture of defence that with 
God's assistance we can defend it against a thousand 
Indians." 

Careful preparation was made for an attack. Buildings 
outside of the ramparts were levelled to the ground, and 
every morning at an hour before dawn the drum beat and 
the troops were ordered to their alarm posts. A heavy 
guard was kept on duty night and day. " I am deter- 
mined to hold my post, spare my men and never expose 
them without necessity. This is what I think you require 
of me," wrote the brave and judicious Ecuyer to Bouquet. 
It was next thing to death to expose a head on the ram- 
parts, or to wander outside the fortification. Lurking 
savages were at hand to pick off the unwary. 

On the 25th of June, the Indians captured a lot of 
horses and cattle, belonging to the fort. A general fire 
was then opened on the fort from all sides. A discharge 
of howitzers threw them into confusion and made them 
act more cautiously. Next morning, Turtle Heart, a Dela- 
ware chief, approached the fort in the guise of friendship, 
and advised the commander and garrison to withdraw and 
take the women and children down to the English settle- 
ments, in order to escape destruction from the six great 
nations of Indians, who were coming to destroy them. He 
promised that they would be protected in making their 
escape. This was the ruse by which so many traders and 
smaller posts had been deceived and finally treacherously 
murdered after they had given up their arms. But Ecuyer 
was not to be caught with such chaff. He replied in a 
very ironical way, thanking the Delaware brothers for their 
great kindness, and assuring them that he and his troops 
could hold the fort against all the Indians that dared to 
attack it. " We are very well off in this place, and we 
mean to stay," said he. He then told them in confidence 
that two great armies were coming, one from the East and 
the other from the Lakes, to destroy the bad Indians, 
while the Cherokees and Catawbas, their old enemies, 

B 



26 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

were joining a third army in Virginia to destroy them. 
This speech seemed to have a demoralizing effect upon 
the savages, who withdrew for a season to meet a large 
body of warriors approaching from the west. During this 
interval Ensign Price, from Fort Le Boeuf, entered Fort 
Pitt with his command of a dozen men, who had gallantly 
defended their little post until it was in flames from burn- 
ing arrows and had then cut their way out of the rear and 
escaped after great peril and suffering. The names of 
this detachment of Royal Americans, as far as given, indi- 
cate their German descent, viz. : Fisher, Nash, Dogood, 
Nigley, Dortinger and Trunk. Captain Ecuyer strength- 
ened his defences with a line of palisades, and constructed 
a rude fire engine to extinguish flames caused by the 
burning arrows of the Indians shot against the sides and 
roofs of wooden buildings. July 26, a small party of In- 
dians came to parley, under the lead of Shingas and 
Turtle Heart. They professed great affection for the 
whites, and great concern for their safety. The Ottawas 
were coming in great force from Detroit to destroy the 
garrison, and they begged their white brothers to depart 
while it could be done in safety. Ecuyer replied that he 
could defend the fort for three years against all the Indians 
in the woods, and that he would never abandon it as long 
as a white man lived in America. He despised the Otta- 
was, and warned his Delaware brothers to keep out of 
reach of his bombshells and cannon loaded with a whole 
bag full of bullets. Thwarted in their crafty and treach- 
erous schemes by which they had succeeded in destroying 
Lieutenant Gordon and his entire command at Venango, 
the Indians began a general attack in earnest. Many of 
them dug holes in the river banks, from which to fire on 
the fort, and from all sides bullets and arrows flew thick 
and fast. The Royal Americans and border riflemen from 
their loopholes drew a bead on every Indian that exposed 
his person in the least. Ecuyer was wounded in the leg 
by an arrow, but kept up the hopes and spirits of his men, 
while at the same time he refused to let them sally forth 
to engage in a hand to hand conflict with the savages, as 
many of them proposed to do. The attack lasted five 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 27 

days and five nights. Ecuyer speaks with great admira- 
tion of the conduct of his men — " regulars and the rest." 
" I am fortunate to have the honor of commanding such 
brave men. I only wish the Indians had ventured an 
assault. They would have remembered it to the thou- 
sandth generation." Bouquet wrote General Amherst, 
August II, in terms of high praise of Ecuyer for the 
defence of the fort and the important additions made to 
the fortifications during the investment. 

In various letters, written from the fort immediately after 
the siege was raised, it is stated that '* to a man they were 
resolved to defend the position ( if the troops had not 
arrived ) as long as any amunition and provisions to sup- 
port them was left ; and that then they would have fought 
their way through or died in the attempt, rather than have 
been made prisoners by such perfidious, cruel and blood- 
thirsty hell-hounds. Some of the women in the fort, it is 
said, helped to defend the place. Many express-riders 
going to and from the garrison have been killed." 

DEFENCE OF FORT LIGONIER. 

At Fort Ligonier matters were even more critical than at 
Fort Pitt. The stockade was bad and the garrison extre- 
mely weak but Byerly and a few other frontier settlers had 
made their way into it with their families and helped to re- 
pulse the assaults of the savages. Lieutenant Archibald 
Blane with a detatchment of Royal Americans was in com- 
mand, and conducted the defense with great courage and 
practical tact. 

On the 4th of June Blane writes : " Thursday last my 
garrison was attacked by a body of Indians, about five in 
the morning ; but as they only fired upon us from the skirts 
of the woods, I contented myself with giving them three 
cheers, without spending a single shot upon them. But as 
they still continued their popping upon the. side next to the 
town, I sent the sergeant of the Royal Americans with a 
proper detachment to fire the houses, which effectually dis- 
appointed them in their plan." 

On the 17th, he writes to Bouquet, "I hope soon to see 

«^**"" I/. 



28 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

yourself and live in daily hopes of a reinforcement. * * 
Sunday last a man straggling out was killed by the Indians. 
* * I believe the communication between Fort Pitt and 
this place is entirely cut off, not having heard from them 
since the thirtieth of May, though two expresses have 
gone from Bedford to that post." On the 21st the Indians 
made a serious attack for two hours. A small party of 
fifteen men were so exceedingly anxious to have a closer 
tilt with the savages that the lieutenant finally yielded to 
their entreaties to let them out to attack some Indians that 
showed themselves at a little distance. As it turned out 
this was only a decoy to entrap them. About a hundred 
savages lay in ambush by the side of the creek about four 
hundred yards from the fort ; and just as the party was 
returning near where they lay, the savages rushed out to cut 
them off and would have succeeded in doing so had it not 
been for a deep morass which intervened. Foiled in this 
movement, more by natural obstacles then by the judg- 
ment or sagacity of the whites, the Indians immediately 
began an attack upon the fort and fired upwards of a thou- 
sand shots without doing any special damage. 

Bouquet was deeply concerned for the safety of Fort 
Ligonier, for on its preservation depended the safety of 
Fort Pitt and his own army of deliverance. A large quan- 
tity of military stores were in the magazines at Ligonier, 
with which the Indians might have blown up Fort Pitt or 
reduced Bouquet's troops to the greatest extremities. A 
picked party of thirty Highlanders was sent by a circu- 
itous route through the woods traveling by night at their 
utmost speed under the escort of experienced guides. 
They got close to the fort without being discovered and 
then by a sudden rush and a running fight they managed 
to get in without losing a man. This was a timely relief 
and ensured the safety of the post until the main body could 
arrive. 

Next to Ligonier in the line of communication came 
Fort Bedford, at a distance of fifty miles across the mount- 
ains and through the wilderness. Captain Lewis Ourry 
was in command here with a mere handful of Royal Ameri- 
cans. On the third of June he wrote Bouquet that owing 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 29 

to the arrival of express riders, ( who were generally sold- 
iers sent from one post to another at the peril of their lives,) 
his regulars were increased to " three corporals and nine 
privates." But he had a large body of settlers who, fright- 
ened by depredations of the Indians in the neighborhood, 
rushed pell-mell to the fort. These he organized into two 
military companies, aggregating 150 men. Over one hun- 
dred families had sought refuge at the fort. When the scare 
was over for the time being the silly people would ven- 
ture out in small squads, and many were thus cut off and 
slain by scalping parties of skulking savages. June seventh 
he writes, "I long to see my Indian scouts come in with 
intelligence ; but I long more to hear the Grenadiers 
march and see more red-coats." Ten days later the 
country people in fancied security had returned to their 
plantation so that Ourry was left alone with a garrison of 
only twelve Royal Americans, who had not only to guard 
the fort but likewise take care of seven Indian prisoners. 
He writes to Bouquet : " I should be very glad to see 
some troops come to my assistance. A fort with five bas- 
tions cannot be guarded much less defended by a dozen 
men, but I hope God will protect us." The killing and 
scalping of some families on Denning's creek threw the 
settlers into a panic again, and in a few days the militia 
were back from their farms and with difficulty could be 
prevented from murdering the Indian prisoners. Ourry 
feared that the Indians, despairing of taking Fort Pitt, 
would fall upon and destroy the smaller posts and ravage 
the settlements, which they doubtless would have done 
had Bouquet's advance been much longer delayed. July 
2d, about twenty Indians attacked a party of mowers and 
killed several of them. Eighteen persons in all were 
killed near Fort Bedford. July 3, Ourry received word 
from Blane of the loss of Presque Isle on Lake Erie, Le- 
boeuf, Venango, &c., which he sends to Bouquet with the 
intimation that Blane had entertained some idea of evacu- 
ating or capitulating Fort Ligonier. Bouquet replied '- 
*' I shivered when you hinted to me Lieut. Bl — 's inten- 
tions. Death and infamy would have been the reward he 
would expect instead of the honor he has obtained by his 



30 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

prudence, courage and resolution. * * This is a most 
trying time. * * You may be sure that all the expedi- 
tion possible will be used for the relief of the few remain- 
ing posts." 

Parkman remarks on the above letter : " Bouquet had 
the strongest reason for wishing that Fort Ligonier should 
hold out. As the event showed its capture would proba- 
bly have entailed the defeat and destruction of his entire 
command." 
THE SITUATION AT CARLISLE. 

Bouquet had his headquarters in Philadelphia as Colonel 
of the first battallion of Royal Americans at the time of 
the outbreak of Pontiac and his confederates. His Royal 
Americans, broken into detachments, had held the line of 
forts and posts between that place and Detroit for over 
six years. As military hermits they held the outposts of 
civilization in the Western wilderness. Bouquet, as we 
have seen, was held in high esteem in Philadelphia. 

He was in the prime of life, had a fine personal pres- 
ence, splendid physique and extraordinary qualities of 
mind and heart. " Firmness, integrity, calmness, pres- 
ence of mind in the greatest of dangers — virtues so essen- 
tial to a commander, were natural to him. His presence 
inspired confidence and impressed respect, encouraged 
his friends and confounded his foes." Such is the esti- 
mate given of Bouquet by some of the best men of the 
provinces who knew him well. He promptly reported the 
situation to General Amherst as Ecuyer had informed 
him in letters written at the end of May. The haughty 
and arrogant Briton could not believe that the despicable 
savages would be so audacious as to besiege his forts or 
attack regular troops of equal numbers with their own. 
It is amusing to read his brag and bluster and to mark the 
change which in some respects seems to come over the 
spirit of his dream as the campaign progresses. 

Bouquet evidently knew his weak and strong points and 
knew how to secure his hearty co-operation in measures 
necessary to the success of the beleaguered garrisons. 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 3 1 

June 23, Amherst ordered Major Campbell to proceed at 
once from New York to Philadelphia with the remains of 
the 42d Regiment of Royal Highlanders, and of the 77th 
Montgomery's Highlanders ; the first consisting of two 
hundred and fourteen men, including officers, and the lat- 
ter of one hundred and thirty-three. These troops had 
just landed from the West Indies and were in a very ema- 
ciated condition, most of them really unfit for service. 
The remains of five more such regiments arrived from 
Havana July 29, numbering in all nine hundred and eighty- 
two men and officers fit for duty ; but by this time Bou- 
quet was beyond Fort Bedford. Amherst seemed incap- 
able of comprehending the magnitude of the danger. 

" If you think it necessary " he writes to Bouquet " you 
will youself proceed to Fort Pitt that you may be better 
enabled to put in execution the requisite orders for secur- 
ing the communication and reducing the Indians to rea- 
son." Bouquet was not the man to shirk duty or danger 
in such a crisis. With all the enegy of his ardent and 
indomitable nature he threw himself into the work of pre- 
paring an expedition for the relief of the invested forts 
and the exposed frontiers. He sent forward orders for the 
collection of stores and transportation at Carlisle as soon 
as the outlook became serious. 

After making the necessary arrangements at Philadel- 
phia, he hastened toward Carlisle. At Lancaster he writes 
to Amherst expressing confidence in his ability to open up 
communication with the troops sent to his assistance. 

Amherst replies " I wish to hear of no prisoners, should 
any of the villains be met with in arms." On the 3d of 
July Bouquet received what he calls the " fatal account of 
the loss of our posts at Presque Isle, Leboeuf and Ve- 
nango." The express rider who brought the message 
from Bedford came through in one day. He told the dis- 
astrous news to the country people who flocked about him 
and remarked, as he rode towards Bouquet's tent, " the In- 
dians will be here soon." 

All was consternation and alarm. Word was sent out 
to the settlements and soon every road was filled with 
panic-stricken fugitives crowding into Carlisle. The In- 



3 2 COL. HENR Y BOUQ UET 

dians were raiding through the Juniata regions and along 
the borders of the Cumberland valley. A scouting party- 
found Shearman's valley laid waste, the dwellings and 
stacked grain on fire, and swine devouring the bodies of 
slaughtered settlers. Twelve young men went to warn 
the people of the Tuscarora valley. They found the work 
of ruin in full blast already and fell into an ambush in 
which they were nearly all killed. 

The country between the mountains and the Susque- 
hanna was abandoned. Two thousand families left their 
homes and fled to the forts and larger towns for protec- 
tion. 

A letter written from Carlisle, July 5, 1763, gives us an 
idea of the terrible panic which existed. " Nothing could 
exceed the terror which prevailed from house to house 
and from town to town. The road was near covered with 
women and children flying to Lancaster and Philadelphia. 

The Rev. , pastor of the Episcopal church, went at 

the head of his congregation to protect and encourage them 
on the way. A few retired to the breastworks for safety. 
The alarm once given could not be appeased. We have 
done all that men can do to prevent disorder. All our 
hopes are turned upon Bouquet." Instead of finding sup- 
plies at hand for his troops and for the relief of the forts, 
Bouquet found a vast crowd of despairing and starving 
people, while crops were being burnt and mills destroyed 
on all sides. July 13th, Bouquet wrote Amherst from 
Carlisle as follows : 

" The list of the people, known to be killed, increases 
very fast every hour. The desolation of so many families 
reduced to the last extremity of want and misery ; the de- 
spair of those who have lost their parents, relations and 
friends, with cries of distracted women and children who 
fill the streets — form a scene painful to humanity and im- 
possible to describe." To procure provisions, horses and 
wagons under the circumstances was indeed a herculean 
task. 

A few friendy Indians at the fort he with difficulty saved 
from the fury of the mob of rustics. Instead of helping 
him forward the settlers were rather a drawback and in- 
cumbrance, and had to be fed from the public crib. 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 33 

THE MARCH TO BEDFORD. 

However, in i8 days after his arrival at Carlisle, by 
JLidicious and energetic measures, a convoy was procured 
and the army set out on its perilous march. 

His entire force did not exceed 500 men, of whom the 
most effective were the 42d Highlanders. Sixty of the 
77th regiment were so weak that they had to be conveyed 
in wagons. They were intended for garrison duty at Bed- 
ford &c., while effective men at those forts were to join 
the army of deliverance. The bare-legged Highlanders with 
their kilts and plaids, and their infirm appearance, gave 
little assurance to the anxious people who watched their 
departure. 

The fate of Braddock a few years previous had not been 
forgotten, nor the desolation and despair that ensued. 
Nearly twice as many English troops had been slain on 
that fatal day as Bouquet had in his entire command, 
while the Indians that now infested the woods were far 
more numerous than those who routed the proudest of the 
Britons eight years previous. 

At Shippensburg, as at Carlisle, a great crowd of starving 
people were found, who had fled from the tomahawk and 
scalping knife. "On July 25, 1763 there were in Shippens- 
burg 1384 of our poor distressed back inhabitants, viz : 
301 men, 345 women and 738 children, many of whom 
were obliged to lie in barns, stables, cellars and un- 
der old leaky sheds, the dwelling houses being all crowd- 
ed," says the chronicles of those days. In such a state of 
affairs it would seem that the provincial authorites and 
frontiers-men themselves would have united in one grand 
effort to drive out the savage destroyers of life and prop- 
erty. But Bouquet could get little or no aid from that 
quarter. A suicidal Quaker policy pervaded the civil 
authorities, while the settlers seemed benumbed with fear 
and despondancy. 

He writes to Amherst, "I find nnself utterly abandon- 
ed by the very people I am ordered to protect * * * 
I have borne very patiently the ill usage of this province, 
having still hopes that they will do something for us ; and 



34 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

therefore have avoided a quarrel with them." His efforts 
to engage a body of frontiersmen for the campaign were 
fruitless. They preferred to remain for the defence of 
their families, forgetting that their homes and families 
could never be secure until the savages had been driven 
back to their haunts beyond the Ohio and chastised into 
submission. Such a force of men, used to the woods and 
enured to pioneer life, would have been of vast service in 
the march. 

The Highlanders were sure to get lost in the woods 
when sent out as flankers. As Bouquet wrote to Amherst 
July 26, "I cannot send a Highlander out of my sight with- 
out running the risk of losing the man, which exposes me 
to surprises from the skulking villians I have to deal with." 

Doubtless, however, the tactics resorted to in 1758 to 
make his men effective against Indian attack and surprise 
during the Forbes campaign, were called into vigorous 
play during this march, as the outcome at Bushy Run 
clearly indicates. At Bedford, where he arrived July 25, 
Bouquet was more fortunate in enlisting frontiersmen and 
succeeded in getting about thirty to march with the army 
for flanking and scouting purposes. 

Murders had continued in the settlements, three men 
having been killed near Shippensburg by prowling sava- 
ges after the army passed. But thus far the troops had 
met with little molestation. 

THE MARCH TO LIGONIER. 

Now, however, began the real perils of the march, and 
greater caution was needed. Forests, rocks, ravines and 
thickets abounded on every side, inviting their wily foe to 
ambush the troops as they threaded their way through the 
valleys and across the mountains. 

But Bouquet knew exactly what the exigencies of the 
situation required. July 28, the army started from Fort 
Bedford. A band of backwoodsmen led the way, followed 
closely by the pioneers ; the wagons and cattle were in 
the centre guarded by the regulars and a rear guard of 
backwoodsmen closed up the line. Frontier riflemen, or 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 3 5 

provincial rangers, scoured the woods on all sides, making 
surprise impossible. Bouquet himself, with musket in 
hand, oftentimes led the advance. Thus they toiled along 
the tedious way, which Burd, under Bouquet's orders, had 
opened through the wilderness five years before. 

The mountain air, the pure water an.d delightful scenery 
had an inspiriting effect upon the Highlanders, who grew 
stronger as they marched along. 

August 2, the little garrison and small body of pioneer 
settlers, who had held Fort Ligonier for two long months, 
were transported with the sight of the red coats of the 
Royal Americans and the kilts and plaids of the Highland- 
ers marching to their rescue. 

" The Campbells were coming " indeed, as the record 
of the bloody fight a few days later fully demonstrates. 
The clan Campbell, whose members have marched so oft 
in many lands to glory and the grave, was well repre- 
sented in the rank and file of Bouquet's army of deliver- 
ance. 

The Indians disappeared as the troops approached, but 
no tidings had been received from Fort Pitt for weeks. 
Bouquet wisely resolved to leave his wagons and oxen be- 
hind, which were the most cumbrous part of his convoy, 
in order to advance more rapidly and be in better shape 
to resist attack. Three hundred and forty pack horses 
were loaded with supplies foi: the needy garrison at Fort 
Pitt, and on the 4th day of August the army marched 
about a dozen miles and encamped for the night. 

Andrew Byerly and his son Michael accompanied the 
troops, in hopes of recovering some of their property, 
which had been left to the mercy of the Indians when the 
family had fled from Bushy Run over two months ago. 
After proceeding a few miles, the boy was sent back for 
some reason, to remain at Fort Ligonier. On his return 
he saw numerous Indian trails crossing the dusty road, 
over which the army had passed. The savages were on 
the alert to ascertain the number and character of the 
troops, and watching their opportunity to surprise and 
ambush them. 

Bouquet had his plans well arranged for the speedy 



$6 COL. HENR Y BOUQUET 

relief of Fort Pitt in a way that would be most likely to 
thwart the designs of the savages. His intention was to 
push on to Bushy Run, which would be an excellent place 
for man and beast to rest and recuperate for a few hours, 
and then set out and make a forced march by night 
through the defiles at Turtle Creek, where he expected 
the savages would try to ambuscade his troops. 

BUSHY RUN BATTLE. 

Accordingly, cm the morning of August 5, 1763, the 
troops set out at an early hour over the hills, and through 
the hollows of what now forms the heart of Westmoreland 
county, Pa. Along the Forbes road, shrouded on all sides 
by dense forests, they moved at a lively rate. By one 
o'clock the jaded column had advanced seventeen miles, 
and Andrew Byerly, along with a detachment of eighteen 
soldiers in the advance, cheered the weary troops with the 
welcome tidings that Bushy Run, their resting place, was 
only half a mile distant. All were pushing forward with 
renewed vigor, when suddenly the whole line was startled 
by the report of rifles in the front. A fierce assault had 
been made on the vanguard and the firing was quick and 
sharp. Twelve out of eighteen fell in the unequal con- 
flict that ensued before the two advance companies could 
press forward to the relief of their comrades. The firing 
became furious, indicating that the Indians were in large 
force and were fighting with unusual courage. 

The convoy of packhorses was halted, the troops were 
formed into line and a general bayonet charge was made 
through the forest. The yelping savages gave way before 
the cold steel of the Highlanders. But just as the route 
seemed' cleared in front, terrible war whoops resounded 
through the woods on either flank, and an uproar among 
the packhorse drivers indicated that the convoy was at- 
tacked in the rear. The troops in advance were instantly 
recalled to defend the convoy. Driving away the savages 
by repeated bayonet charges they formed a circle around 
the crowded and frantic horses. It was a new kind of work 
for the Highlanders, but they bore themselves with great 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 37 

steadiness and remarkable fortitude in spite of the terrific 
and confusing yells of their ferocious assailants and the 
deadly shots that came pouring in upon them from every 
thicket, tree or covert, large enough to conceal a foe. Noth- 
ing but implicit confidence in their commander and in the 
pluck and fidelity of each other could account for their 
undaunted gallantry under such trying circumstances. It 
seemed like pandemonium broke loose. Walter Scott has 
described such a scene : 

*' At once theie rose so wild a yell 
Within that dark and narrow dell, 
As all the fiends from heaven that fell, 
Had pealed the banner-cry of hell." 

Rushing up with terrific whoops, the painted demons 
would pour in a heavy fire, and when the Highlanders 
would charge bayonet they would dodge and vanish be- 
hind trees and thickets only to renew the assault the 
moment the troops returned toward the circle of defence. 

Many brave men fell on that hot afternoon. Captain 
Lieut. Graham and Lieut. Mcintosh of the 42d High- 
landers were killed and Lieut. Graham wounded. Lieut. 
Donald Campbell of the 77th was wounded and Lieut. 
Dow, of the Royal Americans, was shot through the body, 
after killing three Indians. 

Upwards of sixty men were killed or wounded in the 
action which lasted until dark. It was impossible to change 
position and the troops were obliged to lay upon their 
arms where they had stood during the fight. Numerous 
sentinels were posted to guard against a night attack. A 
space was made in the centre of the camp for the wounded, 
around whom a wall of flour bags was erected to protect 
them from the bullets which flew among them thick and 
fast from all side during the fight. It was indeed a sad 
and dreary night for the wounded. 

The agony of thirst was almost intolerable, springs ran 
out of the hill sides near by, but the savages guarded 
them well with their skirmish line, and it was almost cer- 
tain death to approach them. At imminent risk Byerly 
managed to convey a few hatfuls of water to the wounded 
Highlanders. A grateful shower of rain also afforded 



38 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

some relief. After Bouquet had made his dispositions for 
the night he proceeded to write a report of the battle to 
General Amherst, evidently supposing that he was not 
likely to survive the conflict the coming day. The re- 
port was written amid all the bustle of the camp when 
danger and death in their most horrid forms stared him 
in the face, and yet how carefully, calmly and correctly 
everything of note is stated ! Here it is. 

REPORT OF THE FIRST DAY's FIGHT NEAR BUSHY RUN. 

Camp at Edge Hill, 
26 Miles from Fort Pitt, 5th Aug. 1763. 

Sir : The second instant the troops and convoy arrived at 
Ligonier, where I could obtain no intelligence of the enemy. The 
expresses sent since the beginning of July, having been either 
killed or obliged to return, all the passes being occupied by the 
enemy. In this uncertainty, I determined to leave all the wagons, 
with the powder, and a quantity of stores and provisions, at Ligo- 
nier, and on the 4th proceeded with the troops and about 340 
horses loaded with flour. 

I intended to have halted to-day at Bushy Run, ( a mile beyond 
this camp), and after having refreshed the men and horses, to 
have marched in the night over Turtle Creek, a very dangerous 
defile of several miles, commanded by high and rugged hills ; but 
at one o'clock this afternoon, after a march of 17 miles, the sav- 
ages suddenly attacked our advance guard, which was immedi- 
ately supported by the two Light Infantry companies of the 42d 
regiment, who drove the enemy from their ambuscade and pur- 
sued them a good way. The savages returned to the attack, 
and the fire being obstinate on our front and extending along our 
flanks, we made a general charge with the whole line to dislodge 
the savages from the heights, in which attempt we succeded, 
without by it obtaining any decisive advantage, for as soon as 
they were driven from one post, they appeared on another, till, 
by continued reinforcements, they were at last able to surround 
us and attacked the convoy left in our rear ; this obliged us to 
march back to protect it. The action then became general, and 
though we were attacked on every side, and the savages exerted 
themselves with uncommon resolution, they were constantly re- 
pulsed with loss ; we also suffered considerably. Capt. Lieut. 
Graham and Lieut. James Mcintosh, of the 42d, are killed, and 
Capt. Graham wounded. Of the Royal American Regt., Lieut. 
Dow, who acted as A. D. Q. M. G., is shot through the body. 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 39 

Of the 77th, Lieut. Donald Campbell and Mr. Peebles, a volun- 
teer, are wounded. Our loss in men, including rangers and 
drivers, exceeds sixty killed or wounded. 

The action has lasted from one o'clock till night, and we expect 
to begin at daybreak. 

Whatever our fate may be, I thought it necessary to give your 
Excellency this early information, that you may at all events 
take such measures as you think proper with the Provinces, for 
their own safety, and the effectual relief of Fort Pitt, as in case 
of another engagement, I fear insurmountable difficulties in pro- 
tecting and transporting our provisions, being already so much 
weakened by the losses of this day in men and horses, besides the 
additional necessity of carrying the wounded, whose situation is 
truly deplorable. 

I cannot sufficiently acknowledge the constant assistance I 
have received from Major Campbell during this long action, nor 
express my admiration of the cool and steady behavior of the 
troops, who did not fire a shot without orders, and drove the 
enemy from their posts with fixed bayonets. The conduct of the 
officers is much above my praises. 

I have the honor to be with great respect, 

« Sir, &c. Henry Bouquet, 

To His Excellency, Sir Jeffrey Amherst. 

With gloomy forebodings the troops, and especially the 
wounded, awaited the dawn of the coming day. Wild 
whoops and occasional shots from the deep thickets and 
surrounding hillsides, indicated how eager the painted 
demons were to glut their vengeance. The hordes be- 
sieging Fort Pitt had all precipitated themselves upon 
Bouquet, knowing that if he and his supplies could be cut 
off and captured, the reduction of the fort would soon 
follow. It was a very disturbed and broken sleep that 
even the most securely sheltered of the troops could get 
at such a time. 

SECOND day's fight, AUGUST 6. 

With the first gray streaks of dawn came those inces- 
sant savage yells preluding a fierce assault on every side. 
Soon from every tree and bush that could conceal an 
enemy, a galling fire was poured upon the devoted forces 
of Bouquet. The Colonel himself, with his bright uniform. 



40 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

was a conspicuous mark, and the balls whizzed about him 
so thick that he concluded to change his dress. While 
doing so, behind a large tree, no less than fourteen bullets 
struck it. As on the previous day, the savages made fre- 
quent impetuous onsets in order to break through the 
line of defence. But they were firmly met and gallantly 
repulsed at every point. The gleam of the bayonets 
would cause them to retire swiftly to the bushes, but the 
moment the charge ceased they were back again with their 
demoniac yells, popping away at every exposed soldier. 
The long march and hard fight of the previous day, added 
to their burning thirst, " more intolerable than the ene- 
my's fire," as Bouquet puts it, left the troops in rather 
sorry plight to contend with such alert and daring assail- 
ants. The Indians had every advantage on their side in 
the way of shelter from the fire of the troops and being 
without any encumbrance they could attack and retreat 
with the greatest ease and rapidity. The savages marked 
the increasing fatigue and distress of the troops and, con- 
fident of speedy triumph, derided them in bad English 
and vulgar ribaldry. Keekyuskung, a Delaware chief, 
who had taken part in the murder of Colonel Clapham and 
his family, and who was a ringleader in getting up the 
conspiracy in general, was conspicuous in this kind of 
work throughout the morning, as he had been also on the 
previous night. His taunts were all the more provoking, 
as he bellowed them forth from behind a large tree, be- 
cause he had, in times past, received many favors from 
Colonel Bouquet and the Royal Americans, when on his 
visits to Fort Pitt. 

The interior of the camp was in great confusion owing 
to the fright of horses on account of the terriffic war 
whoops resounding on all sides and the hurts received 
from Indian bullets. The cowardly behaviour of the 
pack horse men added to the danger and tumult. They 
forsook the poor brutes and hid themselves in terror 
among the bushes, from which no command or entreaty 
could draw them to a discharge of duty. Breaking away 
from the convoy many of the horses dashed madly through 
the woods, and through the lines of the contending forces. 
The crisis was fearful and only a cool head, fertile in 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 4 1 

resources and a brave heart unappalled by any danger, 
could meet the emergency. The heat, the toil, the thirst, 
the increasing and more audacious assaults of the savages 
began to tell seriously upon the strength and spirits of the 
soldiers. They were growing weaker and falling rapidly 
while their relentless foes were every moment growing 
stronger and bolder. 

It was a crisis requiring the highest kind of military 
genius combined with indomitable resolution. Bouquet 
was equal to the ordeal and from the very jaws of defeat, 
disaster and death he snatched the most brilliant victory 
ever won over the Indians. 

A Captain or Lieutenant Barret, commanding it is said 
a small Maryland detachment of provincial rangers, point- 
ed out to Bouquet a place where a large body of the 
boldest of the Indians might be taken on the flank and 
rear by a well directed bayonet charge around the hill and 
up a hollow or ravine. Andrew Byerlywas with Bouquet 
at the time, and heard Barret make the suggestion, which 
the Colonel quickly put into execution on a large scale by 
a masterly piece of strategy. Immediately Major Camp- 
bell was directed to make a rapid circuit through the woods 
on the right flank of the savages around the hill afore- 
said, taking them in flank and rear. Captain Basset of the 
Royal Engineers was directed to arrange the other com- 
panies, so as to co-operate promptly with the strategic move- 
ment at the right moment. The thin line of troops that 
took the place of the two companies withdrawn from the 
front, gave away before the impetuous onset of the exultant 
savages and fell back upon the convoy, where they pre- 
sented a line of bristling steel. The Indians fell com- 
pletely into the snare and rushed with demoniac fury 
into the camp, certain that the fight was won. 

But just as they supposed themselves masters of the 
field the Highlanders charged in with a wild battle cry 
upon their right flank. A volley was fired upon the 
amazed and huddled savages, but they stood their ground 
with wonderful intrepidity, not willing to loose a decisive 
victory and the great booty of stores and scalps which a 
moment before they felt was within their grasp. It is 



42 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

agreed on all hands that on this occasion, not only in the 
attack and the assault, but in meeting the unexpected 
charge on their flank and rear, the Indians displayed un- 
usual courage and firmness. 

But a well directed bayonet charge no body of Indians 
ever did or will stand. Here Bouquet had them at last 
where he wanted them, at close quarters where there could 
be no dodging or popping from behind the trees. The 
Highlanders were at home with the bayonet and only too 
glad to get a good chance at the painted villains who had 
skulked behind trees while they shot their brave comrades 
during the past two days. Still the savages struggled 
in hope of gaining the day, but the shock was irresisti- 
ble and, perceiving that they had been caught in a trap, 
they fled in tumultuous disorder. In doing so they were 
obliged to pass in front of the companies brought up on the 
opposite side by Capt. Basset, from whom they received 
another volley. The four companies now vied with each 
other in driving the savages through the woods beyond 
Bushy Run without giving them time to reload their 
empty rifles. Many of their chief warriors were killed and 
the rest utterly routed. Among others, Kukyuskung, the 
ungrateful and blatant blackguard, and the famous war 
Chief called ''The Wolf," were slain. 

Amherst had expressed the hope that no prisoners with 
arms in their hands should be taken, and his wish was 
gratified. Historians say that in the fight only one In- 
dian was taken prisoner, and after a little examination 
he was shot down like a captured wolf. Hereby hangs 
a tale, which I was told by my great great grandfather, 
Jacob Byerly, and his son Joseph, on Christmas day 1855, 
two and a-half years before the old Revolutionary veteran 
passed away, at the age of 99 years. He had heard it 
often from his father, who was in the fight. When the 
flight of the savages had fairly begun, a Scotch Highland- 
er dropped his musket and darted after the fugitives, as 
only a fleet-footed Highlander could. Soon he overtook 
and mastered, single-handed, one of the largest of the sav- 
ages, whom he was leading toward the camp, when he was 
met by an officer of Barret's detachment. '' What are you 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 43 

going to do with that fellow ? " said the fussy official. " I 
am taking him to Colonel Bouquet. If you want one, 
there are plenty of them running yonder in the woods, 
and you may catch one for yourself," replied the Highlan- 
der. The officer drew his pistol and shot the prisoner 
through the head, which cowardly deed greatly incensed 
the brave Highlander and called forth the indignant re- 
buke of Bouquet, when informed of the affair. 

Sixty dead Indians were found on the field, and many 
wounded had been conveyed away by their friends. Bou- 
quet had won a decisive but dearly bought victory. Eight 
officers were killed or severely wounded, and in all one 
hundred and fifteen men, or nearly one-fourth of the 
entire force had been killed, wounded or were missing, as 
a result of the two day's conflict. 

The pack horse drivers emerged from the bushes, and, 
in company with some of the Rangers, proceeded to scalp 
the dead Indians, whom the regular troops disdained to 
touch. 

So many of the horses had escaped through their neg- 
lect and cowardice during the conflict that a large quan- 
tity^ of valuable stores had to be destroyed for lack of 
transportation to prevent them from falling into the hands 
of the Indians after the army passed on. Litters were 
made and the wounded were borne to Bushy Run, where 
the army encamped to rest and refresh themselves after 
the exhausting struggle of the past two days. After the 
severe handling they had lately received it was supposed 
the Indians would not molest them soon again. But 
scarcely had they gone into camp before a volley was 
fired into their midst. The angered Highlanders scon dis- 
persed the prowling miscreants without awaiting orders to 
do so. Ten of the wounded died at Bushy Run and were 
buried next day where Harrison city now stands. The 
Indians returned to the battle-field after night and scalped 
all the dead they could find. These gory trophies they 
shook at the garrison and raised the scalp haloo, as they 
marched past Fort Pitt in a body, a short time before the 
army appeared on the morning of Aug. lo. 

As on the night before. Bouquet rested not until he had 



44 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

written his report of the day's conflict, which was done in 
such a complete manner that he never had occasion to 
change or supplement it. 

Through the courtesy of her Majesty's government I 
have been furnished with an authentic copy of Bouquet's 
reports of these conflicts. The official reports are in all 
respects the same as given by Parkman, except the indi- 
cated omission by the copyist of the scalping operations 
of the Rangers and packhorse drivers, which I have sup- 
plied from Parkman's full text. But the detailed tabular 
statement of killed, wounded and missing in the Bushy 
Run battles I have never seen published elswhere, not 
even by Parkman. It is very important and interesting, 
showing the relative losses of the Highlanders, Royal 
Americans and Rangers. The first named formed nearly 
two-thirds of Bouquet's force, and besides having to do 
the heavy work, making repeated bayonet charges, they 
were not used to the Indian's mode of fighting as were 
the small detachments of Rangers and Royal Americans. 
Hence the loss of the gallant Scotch far exceeds that of 
all other parties combined. The 42d Regiment of Royal 
Highlanders bore the brunt of the fierce assaults in front 
in the first days' battle and has a proud record on the roll 
of honor. 

bouquets' report of second day's fight. 

Camp at Bushy Run, 6th Aug. 1763. 

Sir : I had the honor to inform your Excellency in my letter 
of yesterday of our first engagement with the savages. 

We took the post last night on the hill where our convoy halted, 
when the front was attacked, (a commodious piece of ground and 
just spacious enough for our purpose). There we encircled the 
whole and covered our wounded with flour bags. 

In the morning the savages surrounded our camp, at the dis- 
tance of 500 yards, and by shouting and yelping, quite round 
that extensive circumference, thought to have terrified us with 
their numbers. They attacked us early, and under favor of an 
incessant fire, made several bold efforts to penetrate our camp, 
and though they failed in the attempt, our situation was not the 
less perplexing, having experienced that brisk attacks had little 
effect upon an enemy who always gave way when pressed, and 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 45 

appeared again immediately. Our troops were, besides, extremely 
fatigued with the long march and as long action of the preceding 
day, and distressed to the last degree, by a total want ot water, 
much more intolerable than the enemy's fire. 

Tied to our convoy, we could not lose sight of it without ex- 
posing it and our wounded to fall a prey to the savages, who 
pressed upon us, on every side, and to move it was impracticable, 
having lost many horses, and most of the drivers, stupified by 
fear, hid themselves in the bushes, or were incapable of hearing 
or obeying orders. The savages growing every moment more 
audacious, it was thought proper to still increase their confidence 
by that means, if possible, to entice them to come close upon us, 
or to stand their ground when attacked. With this view two 
companies of Light Infantry where ordered within the circle, 
and the troops on their right and left opened their files and filled 
up the space, that it might seem they were intended to cover the 
retreat. The Third Light Infantry company and the Grenadiers 
of the 42d were ordered to support the two first companies. 
This manoeuvre succeeded to our wish, for the few troops who 
took possession of the ground lately occupied by the two Light 
Infantry companies being brought in nearer to the centre of the 
circle, the barbarians mistaking these motions for a retreat, hur- 
ried headlong on, and advancing upon us, with the most daring 
intrepidity, galled us excessively with their heavy fire; but at 
the very moment that they felt certain of success, and thought 
themselves masters of the camp. Major Campbell, at the head 
of the first companies, sallied out from a part of the hill they 
could not observe, and fell upon their right flank. They reso- 
lutely returned the fire, but could not stand the irresistible shock 
of our men, who, rushing in among them, killed many of them 
and put the rest to flight. The orders sent to the other two 
companies were delivered so timely by Captain Basset, and exe- 
cuted with such celerity and spirit, that the routed savages who 
happened that moment to run before their front, received their 
full fire, when uncovered by the trees. The four companies did 
not give them time to load a second time, nor even to look be- 
hind them, but pursued them till they were totally dispersed. 
The left of the savages, which had not been attacked, were kept 
in awe by the remains of our troops, posted on the brow of the 
hill for that purpose ; nor durst they attempt to support or assist 
their right, but being witness to their defeat, followed their exam- 
ple and fled. Our brave men disdained so much as to touch 
the dead body of a vanquished enemy that scarce a scalp was 
taken except by the Rangers and pack-horse drivers. 

The woods being now cleared and the pursuit over, the four 



46 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

companies took possession of a hill in our front, and as soon as 
litters could be made for the wounded, and the flour and every- 
thing destroyed, which, for want of horses, could not be carried, 
we marched without molestation to this camp. After the severe 
correction we had given the savages a few hours before, it was 
natural to suppose we should enjoy some rest, but we had hardly 
fixed our camp, when they fired upon us again. This was very 
provoking ; however, the Light Infantry dispersed them before 
they could receive orders for that purpose. I hope we shall be 
no more disturbed, for, if we have another action, we shall hardly 
be able to carry our wounded. 

The behavior of the troops on this occasion, speaks for itself 
so strongly, that for me to attempt their eulogium would but de- 
tract from their merit. 

I have the honor to be, most respectfully, Sir, &c. 

Henry Bouquet, 

To His Excellency, Sir Jefferey Amherst. 

P. S. — I have the honor to enclose the return of the killed, 
wounded and missing in the two engagements. H. B. 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 
48 COL. HENR Y BOUQUET 

( Colonial Correspondence — Americari and West Indies — Sir 
Jeff. Amherst, 1763, Vol. 97.) 

New York, 3d Sept., 1763. 

My Lord : — On the loth of last month Col. Bouquet got his 
convoy into Fort Pitt, after having been attacked on the 5 th and 
6th by a very numerous body of savages, which he repulsed and 
defeated, though not without some loss on our side. Captain 
Lieut. Graham and Lieut. James Mcintosh, of the 42d, being 
killed, with an officer of Rangers, and four officers wounded — in 
the whole, 49 were killed and 60 wounded. As I have the honor 
to transmit to your Lordship Colonel Bouquet's letter with my 
answers, and the account I made public here of that affair, I need 
not repeat the praises due to the troops for their behavior, clogged 
as they were by a large but necessary convoy, and on a very un- 
toward communication. 
*********** * 

I have honor to be with the utmost respect, my Lord, your 
Lordship's most humble and obedient servant, 

JEFFERY Amherst. 
Right Honorable Earl of Egremont. 

The copies of Col. Henry Bouquet's official reports of 
the battles with the Indians, near Bushy Run, I have 
received direct from the British government, in re- 
sponse to a letter written last January, which was en- 
dorsed by Hon. Wm. S. Stenger, Secretary of Common- 
wealth ; Hon. H. P. Laird, Gen. R. C. Drum, Secretary 
of War Lincoln, and transmitted officially by Secretary of 
State Frelinghuysen. 

The reports of Bouquet, written in the midst of such 
exciting and confusing scenes are models of exactness and 
reflect high honor upon him as a soldier and a scholar. 
Although a Swiss and well acquainted with German, 
French and other European languages, he wrote English 
better than the great majority of English officers. 

With the aid of these reports and Hutchins' map, drawn 
up a few years after the battle, it is easy to locate the field 
of conflict. The first day's fight, where the 42d Highland 
regiment suffered so severely, took place on the Gonaware 
Hills, near Harrison City, located on Bushy Run. The fight 
around the convoy, where the savages were finally am- 
bushed and routed, took place on the Wanamaker farm, a 



AND^HIS CAMPAIGNS. 49 

short distance south-east of Mr. W.'s present residence. 
The old Forbes road ran through the Wanamaker and 
Gongaware farms, along a different line from the present 
road, but that line is well known by Mr. W,, and others, 
who cleared away the native woods on both sides of the 
Forbes road. By comparing the march and resources of 
Bouquet with those of other Indian fighters, we are filled 
with increasing admiration at his success, August 5 and 6, 
1763, on the bloody fields near Bushy Run. 

With a force of less than 500 men, mostly composed of 
raw Highlanders, unused to Indian warfare. Bouquet de- 
fended his convoy of 340 pack-horses and finally routed 
the horde of savages who had fought with unusual cou- 
rage and sagacity. True, he lost about one-fourth of his 
men in killed and wounded, but an equal or greater loss 
was inflicted on his wily and savage foes. Compare this 
with the results of similar conflicts. Braddock, in 1755, 
with 1,400 men, lost nearly 900, and out of 85 officers, 64 
were killed or wounded. And yet he was opposed by 
only a few hundred Indians and French, who lost only 30, 
all told, of their number. As a consequence, the borders 
were desolated for hundreds of miles and thousands of 
pioneers were driven from their homes or massacred. 

Col. Crawford, with 500 men, in 1782, was routed, and 
himself, his son and son-in-law captured and burned at 
the stake. 

Col. Loughrey, with 140 picked frontiersmen from West- 
moreland, was surprised and all his force captured by an 
Indian detachment in 1781. 

Gen. Harmer, 1790, with 300 regulars and over 1,000 
volunteers was routed with a loss of several hundred of his 
best troops. 

Gen. St. Clair, a brave and able officer, 1791, with 1,200 
men, in line of battle, expecting attack and provided with 
artillery, and with large reinforcements near at hand, met 
with overwhelming defeat, and a loss of 68 officers killed 
28 wounded, together with over half of his men. And 
these were for the most part veterans, used to fighting and 
commanded by gallant and experienced officers. 

In the light of these and many similar conflicts in the 
c 



50 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

olden times or in recent years, the valor and ability of 
Bouquet shine forth in replendent colors. Or take a suc- 
cessful Indian fighter like Gen. Anthony Wayne and we 
find that Bouquet stands the peer of the greatest. Gen. 
Wayne had over 1,500 veteran and mounted Kentuckians 
and 2,000 regulars, including artillery in 1794. After 
sharp fighting, he routed about half his number of In-, 
dians, with a loss of -^-^ killed and a hundred of his own 
men wounded. The loss of the Indians was about the same 
as that of the whites. Under Braddock's mangement the 
Indians killed fifty white to every one of their own number 
slain, while under Bouquet's management they lost more of 
their own warriors than they were able to destroy of the 
whites. It is to honor the memory and perpetuate the hero- 
ism of this superb man and his gallant army of deliverance 
that Westmorelanders and all patriotic citizens of West 
Pennsylvania, Virginia and Ohio are invited to assemble on 
the historic field of his grandest triumph, Aug. 6, 1883. 

" The battle of Bushy Run," says Parkman the great 
historian of Colonial timee, " was one of the best contest- 
ed actions ever fought between white men and Indians. 
* * * The Indians displayed throughout a fierceness 
and intrepidity matched only by the steady valor with 
which they were met. In the provinces the victory 
excited equal joy and admiration, especially among those 
who knew the incalculable difficulties of an Indian cam- 
paign. The Assembly of Pennsylvania passed a vote ex- 
pressing their sense of the merits of Bouquet and of the 
services he had rendered to the province. He soon after 
received the additional honor of the formal thanks of the 
King." 

The army in a few days reached Fort Pitt, to the great 
joy and relief of the garrison, whose stock of provisions 
were about exhausted. Bouquet wrote, as follows : 

To Sir Jeffery Amhurst : 

Fort Pitt, Aug. 11. 1763. 

Sir : — We arrived here yesterday without further opposition 
than scattered shots along the road. 

The Delawares, Shawanese, Wiandots and Mingoes, had closely 
beset and attacked this fort from the 27th July to the ist inst., 
when they quitted it to march against us. 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 5 1 

The boldness of those savages is hardly credible ; they had 
taken post under the banks of both rivers close to the fort, where 
digging holes, they kept an incessant fire, and threw fire arrows. 
They are good marksmen, and though our people were . under 
cover, they killed one and wounded seven. Captain Ecuyer is 
wounded in the leg by an arrow. I should not do justice to that 
officer should I omit mentioning, that without engineer or any 
other artificers than a few shipwrights, he has raised a parapet of 
logs round the fort above the old one (which, having not been 
finished was too low and enfiladed) palisaded the inside of the 
area, constructed a fire engine, and, in short, has taken all pre- 
cautions, which art and judgment could suggest, for the preserva- 
tion of this post, open before on three sides, which had suffered 
by the floods. The inhabitants have acted with spirit against the 
enemy, and in the repairs of the fort. Captain Ecuyer expresses 
an entire satisfaction in their conduct. 

The artillery and the small number of regulars have done 
their duty with distinction. 

Sir Jeffery Amherst's letters add to the above accounts, that 
by his last intelligence the number of savages in the two actions 
of the 5th and 6th of August slain, was about sixty, and a great 
many wounded in the pursuit. That the three principle ring- 
leaders of those people, who had the greatest share in fomenting 
the present troubles and were concerned in the murder of Col. 
Clapham, &c., viz: Kikyuscuting, and the Wolf and Butler, 
were, according to the information sent him, killed ; the two 
former in the field, and the last at Fort Pitt. 



THE OWNERSHIP OF THE BUSHY RUN TRACT. 

It has been asserted by some writers, in recent as well 
as colonial days, that Col. Ephraim Blaine was in com- 
mand of Fort Ligonier, which he bravely defended with 
provincial troops until Bouquet came along, after which 
he accompanied the army as commander of the pack-horse 
brigade, and took an active part in the battle of Bushy 
Run, where he came near losing his life, &c. He then re- 
solved that some day he would become the owner of that 
historic field. 

All this is pure fiction, evidently gotten up for a special 
purpose, in order to invalidate the claims of the Byerlys 
to the grant on Bushy Run, originally given by Col. Bou- 
quet and secured by settlement and valuable improve- 
ments. 



52 COL, HENRY BOUQUET 

The name and record of Lieut. Archibald Blane, ( not 
Blaine ), who defended Fort Ligonier with a detachment 
of Royal Americans in 1763, have been confounded with 
those of Col. Ephraim Blaine, who first appears as a com- 
missary sergeant in Bouquet's campaign of 1764, Neither 
Lieutenant A. Blane nor Colonel E. Blaine was in the 
Bushy Run battle. The former wrote Bouquet a letter 
from Fort Ligonier, immediately after the battle, congratu- 
lating him on his recent victory at Bushy Run. See Park- 
man's Pontiac, Vol. IL, p. 160. See also page 407, of 
Washington — Irvine correspondence — where Ephraim 
Blaine's record is correctly sketched. 

The truth is Ephraim Blaine jumped the older and origi- 
nal Byerly claim by a patent, confirmed by the Pennsylva- 
nia Executive Council in the distracted days of 1786, long 
after the death of the elder Byerly, and when his widow 
and children were in no shape to dispute his unjust usur- 
pation. For forty-one pounds of provincial currency, 
when that currency was comparatively worthless, he man- 
aged to get a technical title to the old Byerly tract of over 
300 acres along the Forbes road, on the historic field of 
Bushy Run ! This was bad enough surely, but to make 
him one of the chief heroes in the fight, to boost up the 
unjust claim, is to violate not only the rights of a family 
but the rights of humanity. It pollutes the fountains and 
muddies the sacred stream of history itself. 

It was no great credit to be in command of the pack- 
horse brigade at the Bushy Run battle, as Col. Bouquet's 
report indicates. And we do Col. Blaine's memory a ser- 
vice by relieving him from the equivocal position in which 
certain prominent individuals placed him in the suit for 
ownership of the battle-field, when they testified that Col. 
Blaine took part in the battle of 1763 as commander of 
the pack-horse brigade, &:c. 

Hon. Jos. H. Kuhns, who was counsel for the Blaines 
in the later stages of the suit, ( when Blaine's friends 
claimed that he had bought Byerly 's right and title) told 
the writer a few weeks ago that the general feeling at the 
time of the trial was that the Byerlys had right and jus- 
tice on their side. The presiding judge, being a resident 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 53 

of Carlisle and a special friend of the Blaines, was blamed 
with partiality. Until recently Mr. Kuhns believed the 
fiction about the presence and narrow escape of Col. 
Ephraim Blaine in the battle, &c., which had been palmed 
off in the courts, &c., at the trial. 

But after learning the real facts in the case, and seeing 
how the names and records of Lieut. Archibald Blane and 
Col. Ephraim Blaine had been confounded, he wrote me 
the following candid note on the subject : 

Greensburg, Pa., May 2, 1883. 
Rev. Cyrus Cort : 

Rev. and Dear Sir. — Your esteemed favor received. I am 
satisfied that the story of Blaine's claim to the battle ground is 
apocryphal. He was an intruder upon Byerly, who was, in 
point of fact, the first actual owner of the ground by occupancy 
and legal authority of the proprietary government of Penn'a. 
Respectfully, JOS. H. KUHNS. 

So much for the question of original and rightful owner- 
ship of Bushy Run battlefield. Byerly removed his family 
to Fort Bedtord, by advice of Bouquet, until peace was 
firmly established at the end of next year. He then re- 
turned and occupied the grant on Bushy Run. About 
the time of the breaking out of the Revolutionary war, he 
took his son Andrew to Lancaster, Pa., to give him a 
chance to get an education at the 'home of his step-sisters. 
While on this visit the old gentleman died, and was buried 
at Strasburg, in that county. I am indebted to Ad. J. 
Eberly, esq., and Rev. J. A. Peters for the following facts, 
which should have been stated at page 17 : 

Record book B, page 349, contains a deed from James 
Hamilton, esq., to Andreas Byerly, for a lot of ground on 
east side of North Queen street, a frontage of 64 feet and 
4^ inches and a depth of 245 feet, in the town of Lancas- 
ter, Pa., dated October 25, 1745. 

The baptismal records of the First Reformed church of 
Lancaster, Pa., mention Andreas Byerly as standing spon- 
sor for a child, Feb. 3, 1745. So also on May 3, 1750, he 
and his wife served in same capacity for a child by name 
of Houck, from Strasburg Twp., and again for a Backen- 



54 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

stopp, Feb. 4, 1753, under the pastorates of Revs. Schnorr- 
bock and Otterbein, respectively. 

The Byerly family resided for greater safety at Fort 
Walthour during the Revolution. Jacob served in several 
campaigns against the Indians, and killed a chief in a fight 
near Brady's Bend, when quite a young man. 

Mrs. Byerly was a very intelligent, humane and pious 
woman. She had been well trained in the doctrines of 
the Reformed Church of Switzerland. She did good ser- 
vice as a nurse and a kind of doctoress during those dark 
and dangerous days. But her care was extended to the 
soul as well as body. She established a Sunday school 
for the intellectual and religious training of the neglected 
children at the fort, and in various ways was a public 
benefactress. Some years after Mr. Byerly's death she 
was married to a Mr. Lord, an Englishman. She lies 
buried among her children at the old Brush Creek grave- 
yard. Andrew Byerly had four sons, viz. : Michael, 
Jacob, Francis and Andrew. Their descendants are scat- 
tered over a great part of the United States. Jacob en- 
tered the Revolutionary army at sixteen, and saw hard 
service for several years in helping to guard the frontiers 
against Indians and Tories. His son Andrew was major 
in the War of 1812, and guarded the ships of Commodoie 
Perry's fleet, while being built on Lake Erie. Benjamin 
was a lieutenant and Joseph a private, as also his son-in- 
law, Skelly, in the same war. Benjamin was likewise 
sheriff and assemblyman. 

Captain George A. Cribbs, who fell at the head of his men 
at the second battle of Manassas, was married to a grand 
daughter of Jacob Byerly, and Sergeant Cyrus Rankin, 
who fell on the Peninsula, was a great grandson. 

Mrs. James Gregg, of Greensburg, is a granddaughter 
of Michael, and Daniel C. Byerly, deceased, was a grand- 
son. 

Prof. Andrew Byerly, of Millersville Normal School, is 
a grandson of Andrew II. 

The descendants of Francis Byerly are numerous in 
Iowa. Michael, Jacob and Francis married three sisters 
named Harmon, whose mother was Christina Lenhart, 
from Holland. Jacob was married in old Fort Walthour, 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 55 

by 'Squire Trouby, during the Revolution. He and his 
son Joseph are buried with fine military monuments at 
Brush Creek graveyard. 

EVIL RESULTS OF PROVINCIAL APATHY. 

After their discomfiture at Bushy Run, the Indians 
moved from their towns along the Alleghany and Ohio 
rivers into the Muskingum country, where they fancied 
themselves entirely safe from molestation, while at the 
same time they could carry on their depredations by sud- 
den incursions into the white settlements. It would have 
been wise policy and an immense saving of life and treas- 
ure had they been followed at once to their forest fast- 
nesses and brought to terms by a display of military 
prowess in their own haunts. 

This was exactly what Bouquet proposed to do. As 
soon as he had brought his heavy convoy through from 
Fort Ligonier to Port Pitt, he made strenuous efforts to 
secure reinforcements for such an expedition into the 
heart of the Indian country. 

August 27, 1763, he wrote General Amherst from Fort 
Pitt that with a re-inforcement of three hundred Provincal 
Rangers he could destroy all the Delaware towns " and 
clear the country of that vermin between this fort and 
Lake Erie." He bitterly complained that the provinces 
would not even furnish escorts to convoys, so that his 
hands were completely tied, He candidly admitted the 
importance and value of provincials for service against the 
savages in the woods, something which Amherst, like 
Braddock before him, was loth to do. 

October 24, 1763, he writes the haughty and obstinate 
Amherst as follows : " Without a certain number of 
woodsmen I cannot think it advisable to employ regulars 
in the woods against savages, as they cannot procure any 
intelligence and are open to continual surprises, nor can 
they pursue to any distance their enemy when they have 
routed them ; and should they have the misfortune to be 
defeated, the whole would be destroyed, if above one day's 
march from a fort. That is my opinion, in which I hope 
to be deceived." 



5" COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

The Quaker Provincial authorities, backed by the Dun- 
kard and Mennonite elements among the Germans, seemed 
to be utterly insensible to the dangers and sufferings of 
the exposed settlements near the borders. In their more 
secure abodes in the older settlements they would prate 
about the wickedness of wa;r, and try to justify their im- 
practicable theories by extensive scriptural quotations. 

St. Paul teaches that civil government is a divine insti- 
tution, and its representatives must not bear the sword in 
vain, but be a terror to evil-doers and a praise to them 
that do well. See Rom., 13. 

All this was ignored, and in place of it was substituted 
a perverted theory of non-resistance. The exhortations 
to individual Christians to forego the gratification of pri- 
vate or personal revenge, on the ground of the old law of 
retaliation, was applied to civil rulers and governments in 
a way that was contrary to reason and Scripture. 

The Great Cove, in Blair county, was settled by Dunk- 
ards as early as 1755. These were exposed to Indian 
raids. " Gottes unlle set getha?i,'' they would say, while the 
brutal savages were tomahawking their wives and children, 
in whose defence they would not lift a finger. They 
seemed to think that it was the Lord's will that the devil 
and his agents should have full swing without opposition. 

The strong and vigorous Scotch Presbyterian and the 
German Reformed and Lutheran elements of the popula- 
tion had no patience or sympathy with such sentimental 
views. When their families or friends were being ruth- 
lessly slaughtered by the savages, they were filled with 
indignation against all who either directly or indirectly 
abetted the cruel destroyers of life and property. 

Large numbers of Reformed and Lutheran families had 
settled along the Codorus, the Conewago, the Monocacy 
and Connocheague streams of Pennsylvania and Maryland, 
where regularly organized congregations existed already 
in 1748, as we learn from the " Life and Travels of Rev. 
Michael Schlatter." So also at Winchester and other 
points through the Shenandoah Valley. 

The Royal American Regiment, as we have seen, was 
largely composed of this element and commanded by ex- 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 57 

perienced German and Swiss officers, who had seen service 
in the armies of the Dutch Republic. 

The horrors of savage warfare fell upon these settle- 
ments and soldiers, together with their Scotch-Irish neigh- 
bors, in the Conococheague settlements. 

The friendly Conestoga Indians in Lancaster county 
and the Moravian Indian converts along the Lehigh were 
blamed for harboring and abetting some of the marauding 
Indians, and the full force of popular fury was arrayed 
against them. When homes were being daily deso- 
lated, parents tomahawked and scalped, and children 
carried into heathen captivity, it was natural for the 
people to hate the name of Indian and to be filled 
with wrath at any one who would protect or counte- 
nance any member of the race. The supineness of 
the Provincial Assembly, and their failure to second the 
efforts of such a man as Bouquet was discouraging and 
demoralizing and provoking in the extreme to the regular 
troops, who had suffered so much oh the outposts, and to 
the hardy pioneers in the advanced settlements. The 
Paxton Boys, in their riotous conduct at the Lancaster 
jail and in their march to Philadelphia, helped to awaken 
the Quakers from their dream of lethargic indifference. 
The Royal Americans had been kept in the woods for 
over six years, and now Amherst sought to compel regulars 
to remain in service after the long term of enlistment had 
expired. These causes combined to produce great discon- 
tent, both among officers and men. They were expected 
to hold many important posts and keep up long lines of 
communication in the midst of the wilderness, surrounded 
by prowling and hostile savages. Lieut. Archibald Blane 
and the gallant Capt. Ecuyer asked Bouquet to be relieved 
from labors and responsiblilities too heavy for their 
strength and resources. And Bouquet himself chagrined, 
at some action of the British government which seemed 
to shut the door of promotion against foreign born officers, 
and worried out of patience by the ingratitude and neglect 
of the provinces, felt himself constrained to do the same 
thing. 



5 8 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

Amherst had left for England, disgusted with the situa- 
tion and angry at the provinces for want of co-operation. 
General Gage had taken his place as commander-in-chief. 
Bouquet wrote Gage, June 20, 1764, asking to be relieved 
of the command, the burden and fatigues of which were 
too great for his strength to endure much longer. 

He thus refers to the condition of the troops at the 
same time: " The three companies of Royal Americans 
were reduced, when I met them at Lancaster, to 55 men, 
having lost -^^ by desertion, in my short absence. I look 
upon Sir Jeffery Amherst's orders forbidding me to con- 
tinue to discharge, as usual, the men whose term of service 
was expired, and keeping us seven years in the woods, as 
the occasion of this unprecedented desertion. The en- 
couragement given everywhere in this country to deserters, 
screened almost by every person, must in time ruin the 
army unless the laws against harbourers are better en- 
forced by the American (provincial) government." 

But Gage would not consent to relieve so useful a man 
in such an emergency. It was agreed that two strong 
bodies of troops should proceed into the Indian country 
to do what Bouquet was anxious to do the previous sum- 
mer, i. e. chastise the savages into submission in their own 
native strongholds. Bradstreet was to take a large force by 
way of the Lakes and co-operate with Bouquet, who was 
to march with his Bushy Run veterans (what was left of 
them) and a large force of provincial rangers to be raised 
in Pennsyslvania, Virginia and Maryland. 

The Pennsylvania Assembly voted to raise three hun- 
dred men to guard the frontiers and one thousand to join 
Bouquet's expedition into Ohio. Virginia and Maryland 
at first refused to do anything for the common defence. 

MASSACRE OF A SCHOOL-MASTER AND TEN SCHOLARS. 

The summer of 1764 was rapidly passing away, and 
nothing effective had yet been done. The Indians con- 
tinued their ravages and penetrated deeper and deeper 
into the settlements, killing and slaying the defenceless 
people. 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 59 

"In 1764, July 26, three miles northwest of Greencastle, 
Frankhn county, Pa. , was perpetrated what Parkraan, the great 
historian of Colonial times, pronounces ' an outrage unmatched 
in fiend-like atrocity through all the annals of the war.' This 
was the massacre of Enoch Brown, a kind-hearted exemplary 
Christian schoolmaster, and ten scholars, eight boys and two 
girls. Ruth Hart and Ruth Hale were the names of the girls. 
Among the boys were Eben Taylor, George Dustan and Archie 
McCullough. All were knocked down like so many beeves and 
scalped by the merciless savages. Mourning and desolation came 
to many homes in the valley, for each of the slaughtered inno- 
cents belonged to a different family. The last named boy, in- 
deed, survived the effects of the scalping knife, but in a some- 
what demented condition. 

The teacher offered his life and scalp in a spirit of self-sacrifiic- 
ing devotion if the savages would only spare the lives of the little 
ones under his charge and care. But no ! the tender mercies of 
the heathen are cruel, and so a perfect holocaust was made to the 
Moloch of war by the relentless fiends in human form. The 
school house was located on the farm now occupied by Mr. Henry 
Diehl, and formerly owned by Mr. Christian Koser. It stood in 
a cleared field, at the head of a deep ravine, surrounded by dense 
forests. Down this ravine the savages fled a mile or two until 
they struck Conococheague creek, along the bed of which, to con- 
ceal their tracks, they traveled to the mouth of Path Valley, up 
which and across the mountains they made good their escape to 
their village, near the Ohio. 

It is some relief to know that this diabolical deed, whose re- 
cital makes us shudder even at this late date, was disapproved by 
the old warriors when the marauding party of young Indians 
came back with their horrid trophies. Neephaughwhese, or 
Night Walker, an old chief or half-king, denounced them as a 
pack of cowards for killing and scalping so many children. 

But who can describe the agony of those parents in the Cono- 
cocheague, settlement weeping like Rachel for her children and 
refusing to be comforted ? Or who can describe the horror of 
the scene in that lonely log school house, when one of the settlers 
chanced to look in at the door to ascertain the cause of the un- 
usual quietness. 

In the centre lay the faithful Brown, scalped and lifeless, with 
a Bible clasped in his hand. Around the room were strewn the 
dead and mangled bodies of seven boys and two girls, while little 
Archie, stunned, scalped and bleeding, was creeping around 
among his dead companions, rubbing his hands over their faces 
and trying to gain some token of recognition. 



6o COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

A few days later the innocent victims of savage atrocity re- 
ceived a common sepulture. All were buried in one large, 
rough box at the border of the ravine, a few rods from the school 
house where they had been so ruthlessly slaughtered. Side by 
side, with head and feet alternately, the little ones were laid with 
their master, just as they were clad at the time of the massacre. 
Strange to say, no memorial tablet has ever been erected over 
their remains. Tradition has preserved the exact location of the 
common grave of master and scholars, and it is not too late yet 
for grateful, patriotic and philanthropic Christian people, enjoy- 
ing the blessings of civilization, peace and prosperity, to render 
this duty of the living to the martyred dead. 

August 4, 1843, or seventy-nine years after the slaughter, a 
number of the principal citizens of Greencastle made excava- 
tions to verify the traditional account of the place and manner 
of burial. Some remains of the rough coffin were found at quite 
a depth from the surface, and then the skull and other remains 
of a grown person, alongside of which were remains of several 
children. Metal buttons, part of a tobacco-box, teeth, &c., 
were picked up as relics by those present, among whom were 
some of our citizens still living with us in a green old age, viz : 
Dr. Wm. Grubb, Dr. J. K. Davison, Geo. W. Zeigler, Esq., 
and Gen. David Detrich. 

There was a good deal of talk at the time about the propriety 
of buying the adjacent grounds, laying out a road and erecting 
a monument; but nothing definite was ever done. Mr. Koser, 
the owner of the farm, took a lively interest in the matter, and in 
lieu of a better memorial planted four locust trees to mark the 
corners of the grave. Two of these only survived and are men- 
tioned by S. H. Eby, Esq., Sup't of Common Schools, in his 
interesting report, published 1877. But, alas ! even these im- 
perfect historic landmarks were cut down a few years ago for 
the sake of making a few posts, and Mr. Koser's well-meant ef- 
forts to preserve the identity of the grave have thus in a meas- 
ure been thwarted. The stumps remain as frail indices by which 
the exact location of the grave may still be accurately determined. 

Such is the present state of the case as ascertained last Wed- 
nesday (April II, 1883), on a visit to the spot by Gen. David 
Detrich, Col. B. F. Winger and Rev. Cyrus Cort." 

The foregoing is an extract from an article that ap- 
peared in the Greencastle Press. 

1 am glad to be able to report that as a result of the visit 
just mentioned, steps having been taken by public spirited 
citizens of Greencastle to have the grave of Brown and 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 6 1 

his martyred scholars duly marked by a permanent monu- 
ment at an early day. 

Atrocities like these helped to arouse the slumbering 
provinces to the necessity of bold amd energetic measures. 

CAMPAIGN OF 1764. 

On the 5 th of August the two Pennsylvania battallions 
under Lieut. Colonels Francis and Clayton were assembled 
at Carlisle. Gov. Penn had come up from Philadelphia 
with Col. Bouquet and addressed the troops. He spoke 
of the necessity of chastising the Indians " for their re- 
peated and unprovoked barbarities on the inhabitants of 
the Province, a just resentment of which added to a re- 
membrance of the loyalty and courage of our provincial 
troops on former occasions he did not doubt, would ani- 
mate them to do honour to their country, and that they 
could not but hope to be crowned with success as they 
were to be united with the same regular troops and under 
the same able commander who had by themselves on that 
very day, the memorable 5th of August, in the preceeding 
year, sustained the repeated attacks of the savages and 
obtained a complete victory over them." 

Gov. Penn also' reminded them of the exemplary pun- 
ishments that would be inflicted on the grevious crime of 
desertion, if any of them were capable of so far forgetting 
their solemn oath and duty to their king and country as to 
be involved in it. Col. Bouquet then took command of the 
troops, regular and provincial. After four days of neces- 
sary preparation for the long march, the army set out. 

Col. Bouquet gave very strict " orders to officers and 
men to observe strict discipline and not to commit the 
least violation of the civil rights or peace of the inhabi- 
tants." 

His care and conduct in this respect stand forth in 
happy contrast with that of many militia or emergency 
men who came up the valley to defend the borders from 
invasion a hundred years later, but who in the end were 
more harmful and more dreaded by the loyal people of 
the borders than the disciplined host of Southern invaders 
under Lee. 



62 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

DESERTIONS OF PROVINCIAL TROOPS. 

In spite of all precautions, no less than 200 desertions 
took place by August 13, when the army reached Fort 
Londoun. 

Bouquet asked permission to fill up the contingent, 
which was granted by resolution of the governor and com- 
missioners August 16. He then applied to Colonel Lewis 
for 200 Virginia volunteers, to take the place of the de- 
serters. With the co-operation of Governor Fauquier the 
men were soon raised and joined Bouquet at Fort Pitt in 
the latter part of September. 

These Virginia volunteer riflemen were among his best 
troops, but in the end, Virginia ungratefully left Col. 
Bouquet in the lurch as regards their payment. 

At Fort Loudoun, Bouquet received a very presumptu- 
ous and characteristic letter from Col. Bradstreet, telling 
him that he need not proceed any farther, inasmuch as 
peace had been concluded with the Delawares and Shaw- 
anese. At that very time these same tribes were scalping 
settlers in all directions. Bradstreet was ambitious to 
gain all the glory of the campaign. Instead of minding 
his own business and compelling the Lake Indians to 
bring in their captives and give proper guarantees of sub- 
mission, he turned aside in his course to attend to the 
business assigned to Bouquet, who was his superior officer. 
As the whole scheme was a ruse on the part of the Ohio 
Indians to gain time and prevent Bouquet's advance, he' 
and General Gage were both indignant at Bradstreet and 
repudiated his officious intermeddling. 

Without delaying an hour, Bouquet pushed forward. 
September 5, he had reached Fort Bedford, where more 
Pennsylvanians deserted, taking along their arms and 
horses. A large reinforcement of friendly Indians, prom- 
ised to be sent from the Six Nations by Sir. Wm. Johnson, 
never arrived. At Ligonier he received from Gen. Gage 
the hearty endorsement of his own conduct, and the re- 
pudiation of Bradstreet 's unwarranted and premature ne- 
gotiations with irresponsible representatives of the Ohio 
Indians. 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 63 

ARRIVAL AT FORT PITT. 

He passed safely over the historic field of Bushy Run to 
Fort Pitt, where he was rejoiced to receive the Virginia 
reinforcement. Ten Indians came to the opposite bank 
of the river, proposing a conference. Finding that they 
were evidently spies, endeavoring to gain important infor- 
mation, he detained two of them as hostages, and sent 
another one with two messengers to Bradstreet and a state- 
ment to the Ohio Indians that if any harm was done to 
these two men, the Indian hostages in his hands should be 
put to death at once and dire vengeance executed against 
their entire nation. Several Iroquois Indians came into 
the fort, pretending great friendship, and assuring him 
that the Ohio Indians would speedily return all the 
white captives. They spoke of the difficulty of pene- 
trating the hilly forests and the great numbers of the In- 
dians who would oppose the army, but who would soon ful- 
fil all his stipulations if he only remained quietly at Fort 
Pitt. The whole object of these crafty envoys was evi- 
dently to delay the campaign until bad weather and late- 
ness of the season made it impossible. 

Bouquet saw through their designs and sent them to 
tell the Delawares and Shawanese, &c., that he was on his 
way to punish their cruel and perfidious conduct unless 
they made prompt and complete submission to his terms. 

THE MARCH INTO OHIO. 

Early in October the army left Fort Pitt to cut a road 
directly through the unexplored wilderness of Ohio. The 
Colonel assured the troops of his confidence in their bra- 
very and told them that " he did not doubt but that this 
war would soon be ended, under God, to their own honor 
and the future safety of their country, provided the men 
were strictly obedient to orders and guarded against the 
surprises and sudden attacks of a treacherous enemy, who 
never dared to face British troops in an open field." 

Large droves of sheep and cattle were taken along for 
subsistence, besides great droves of packhorses loaded with 
flour and other provisions. The Virginia woodsmen acted 



64 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

as scouts and flankers in front and on the sides, whilst the 
pioneers cleared the road through the dense forest. The 
army, with flocks and herds and camp equipage, followed 
the pioneers at the rate of seven or eight miles a day, mov- 
ing constantly in a series of concentric hollow squares, 
with flocks, herds, baggage, packhorses, &c., in the centre. 
Thus in line of battle and guarding carefully against 
ambush and surprise, they moved steadily forward. Skulk- 
ing Indians were watching every movement, but no direct 
attempt was made to interfere with the progress of the 
troops. The strictest discipline was enforced. Be- 
fore leaving Fort Pitt two soldiers had been shot for de- 
sertion, and all superfluous women ordered back to the 
settlements. One woman was allowed to each corps, and 
two nurses for the general hospital. These were needed 
to look after the children and female captives, whose re- 
covery was one chief object of the expedition. In ten 
days the army reached the Muskingum, and was now in 
the heart of the Indian country. Near the fording of 
that river, they saw the wigwams of loo families of Tus- 
carora Indians who had fled in terror at their approach. 
The two soldiers sent to Bradstreet, now appeared, having 
been detained by the Delawares on trifling pretexts until 
they saw the invasion was an overwhelming success. They 
brought word that the chiefs would come in a few days 
to hold a conference. 

COUNCIL ON THE MUSKINGUM — CAPTIVES RESTORED. 

Bouquet marched along the Muskingum until he found 
ample forage in the broad meadows for his cattle, sheep 
and packhorses ; he erected a palisaded depot for pro- 
visions and baggage. Soon a number of chiefs appeared, 
stating that great numbers of warriors were eight miles 
distant, and that a place and time should be appointed 
for council. He designated a spot near the river bank 
where he would meet them next day. A party of woods- 
men soon prepared a rustic arbor, where English oflicers 
and Indian chiefs might meet under shelter. Every pre- 
caution was used to prevent a surprise or attack. Guards 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 65 

were doubled and no straggling allowed. The soldiers 
were drawn up so as to make the most stunning impres- 
sion upon the minds of the savages. And truly it was a 
wonderful sight to see such a vast body of troops fully 
equipped in the midst of the wilderness, with flocks and 
herds, and other resources needed for a protracted cam- 
paign. The scene was as picturesque as it was astounding 
m its display of miltary prowess. 

The Highland grenadiers were there with their plaids, kilts 
and tartans, whom the Indians styled, " petticoat warriors" 
on account of their queer dress. The Royal Americans 
were on hand with their bright red British uniforms, the 
duller garb and duller trappings of Pennsylvania troops 
and the fringed hunting frocks of the Virginia backwoods 
riflemen made such a combination of military pomp and 
power as has been rarely seen in any land. 

The chiefs came at the appointed hour — Kiashuta, or 
Guyashuta, the chief of a band of Senecas, Custaloga chief 
of the Delawares, Keisnauchtha, chief of the Shawanese, 
each with a band of warriors, were the leaders along with 
Turtle Heart, Beaver, &c., they tried to frame excuses 
tor their teacherous conduct, blaming it on the rashness of 
their young men and the western tribes led in person by 
Pontiac, they begged for peace and promised to return to 
him all white prisoners in their hands. 

Bouquet thoroughly understood the Indian character, 
and knew what demeanor and tactics suited the occa- 
sion. He told them to return next day to receive his an- 
swer. Inclement weather prevented their proposed meet- 
ing until the twentieth. Instead of calling them brothers 
he began : " Sachems, War chiefs and Warriors." He 
then addressed them with great spirit, and in severe and 
impassioned language. He pointed out the absurdity of 
their trifling excuses, and reminded them of their un- 
paralleled treachery and cruelty in plundering traders and 
settlers, capturing children and in assulting the king's 
troops in the woods at Bushy Run, last summer. He 
denounced their continued murderous forays upon the 
border settlements, and condemned their repeated failures 
to bring back the white prisoners in their hands. He will 



66 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

not be deceived longer by their false promises. " If," 
said he, " it were possible that you could convince us that 
you sincerely repent of your past perfidy, and that we 
could depend on your good behavior for the future, you 
might yet hope for mercy and peace. If I find that you 
faithfully execute the following preliminary conditions, 
I will not treat you with the severity you deserve. I give 
you twelve days from this date to deliver into my hands 
at Waukatamake, all prisoners in your possession without 
any exception, Englishmen, Frenchmen, women, children, 
whether adopted in your tribes, married or living amongst 
you under any denomination and pretence whatsoever, 
together with all negroes. And you are to furnish the 
said prisoners with clothing, provisions and horses to carry 
them to Fort Pitt. When you have fully complied with 
these conditions, you shall then know on what terms you 
may obtain the peace you sue for." 

Bouquet was as wise and sagacious as he was brave and 
generous. The manner as well as the sentiments of his 
address made a deep and lasting impression upon the sup- 
plicating savages. Their haughty spirit was completely 
humbled. 

They abjectly promised to comply fully with all the con- 
ditions. The Delawares had already delivered up eighteen 
prisoners. They handed over eighty-three small sticks 
indicating the remaining number of prisoners in their 
hands, whom they promised to bring in as soon as possi- 
ble. The Shawanese failed to respond properly to the 
Colonel's wishes, either by appearing at the council with 
their kings or by bringing in the captives in their hands. 
A sharp message was sent to them not to trifle with the 
patience of the commander. The army marched some 
thirty odd miles further to the Forks of the Muskingum, 
where it was agreed to await the prisoners instead of at 
Waukatamake. The principal chiefs of each tribe he kept 
in his possession as hostages to secure the fulfillment of 
pledges. Great care had to be taken to prevent a general 
stampede of the tribes and the murder of all the prisoners 
in their hands as well as to secure a full compliance with 
the conditions of restoration. Bouquet's management in- 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 67 

spired them with confidence and respect, while at the same 
time it filled them with terror and brought them into com- 
plete submission "to his commands. Runners were sent 
out in all directions, and soon several hundred captives 
were brought into camp. Among these were ninety Vir- 
ginians, of whom thirty-two were adult males and the rest 
were women and children ; one hundred and sixteen 
Pennsylvanians, forty-nine men and sixty-seven women 
and children were also returned. Many of the vol- 
unteers had wives, children and relatives among the cap- 
tives, and the scenes that took place at the recovery and 
recognition of the long lost loved ones were touching 
in the extreme. With great sorrow and reluctance the 
Indians parted with these adopted members of their house- 
holds. For, be it remembered, that when once an Indian 
had adopted a captive, the captive was henceforth treated 
as a member of the family and not as a slave. The cap- 
tive women were, as a rule, absolutely free from insult and 
were not even obliged to marry against their will. • The 
reverse of this is the case among many of the Western and 
South-western tribes of Indians at the present day, who 
treat their captives as slaves and always outrage the women. 
Many of the Shawanese warriors were absent on hunting 
expeditions, so that nearly a hundred captives could not 
be reached. Hostages were given for the safe delivery of 
these at Fort Pitt. Bouquet maintained a stern and indig- 
nant demeanor until all conditions were fulfilled as far as 
possible, knowing that any other deportment under cir- 
cumstances would be mistaken for timidity and indecision. 
Kindness can only be appreciated by a savage when he 
knows you have ability to overwhelm him if refractory. 
Having fully convinced them of his prowess and displeasure 
at everything like duplicity. Bouquet convened the chiefs 
in the rustic council house again and intimated his satis- 
faction with their conduct and his desire to arrange for a 
lasting peace. 

Guyasutha, the celebrated Seneca chief, who had been 
the leading spirit of the eastern wing of Pontiac's con- 
spiracy, and had led the forces around Fort Pitt and at 
Bushy Run, made the opening speech in the metaphorical 



68 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

and eloquent language so characteristic of Indian orators. 
"Brother," said he, addressing Col. Bouquet, "with this 
string of wampum I dispel the thick cloud that has hung 
so long over our heads, that the sunshine of peace may 
once more descend to warm and gladden. I wipe the tears 
from your eyes and condole with you on the loss of your 
brethren who have perished in this war. I gather their 
bones together and cover them deep in the earth, that the 
sight of them may no longer bring sorrow to your hearts, 
and I scatter dry leaves over the spot, that it may depart 
forever from memory. The path of peace, which once 
ran between your dwellings and mine, has of late been 
choked with thorns and briars, so that no one could pass 
that way, and we have both forgotten that such a path 
had ever been. I now clear away all such' obstructions 
and make a broad, smooth road, so that you and I may 
freely visit each other as our fathers used to do. I kindle 
a great council fire whose smoke shall rise to heaven in 
view of all the nations while you and I sit together and 
smoke the peace pipe at its blaze." 

The orators of each tribe spoke in similar strain promis- 
ing to lay down their arms and live hereafter in peace with 
the English. Bouquet replied to each and all as follows : 
" By your full compliance with the conditions which I im- 
posed you have satisfied me of your sincerity and I now 
receive you as brethren. The King, my master, has com- 
misioned me, not to make treaties but to fight his battles ; 
and though I now offer you peace it is not in my power 
to settle its precise terms and conditions. For this I refer 
you to Sir William Johnson, his Majesty's agent and 
superintendent for Indian affairs, who will settle with you 
the articles of peace and determine everything in rela- 
tion to trade. Two things, however, I shall insist on. 
And first you are to give hostages as security that you 
will preserve good faith and send without delay a deputa- 
tion of your chiefs to Sir William Johnson. In the next 
place these chiefs are to be fully empowered to treat in 
behalf of your nation ; and you will bind yourselves to 
adhere strictly to everything they shall agree upon in your 
behalf." 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 69 

These conditions were readily complied with, and chiefs 
duly designated for the mission to Sir William. 

And now having gained all his points, Bouquet to the 
great joy and relief of the Indians extended for the first 
time the hand of friendship, which hitherto he had reso- 
lutely refused to do. 

Nettowhatways, the chief of the Turtle tribe, having 
failed to co-operate properly in the peace measures, Col. 
Bouquet deposed him and directed his tribe to elect an- 
other chief and present him as their proper representa- 
tive, which was done a few days later. 

Nov. 12, Red Hawk, Nimwha, Lavissimo, Bennevissico, 
and other leading Shawnese chiefs made their submission. 
Red Hawk instead of proposing in usual Indian style to 
bury the hatchet (which might in that case be dug up 
again) said that they as younger brothers would take it out 
of the hands of their older white brothers and " throw it 
up to God " that they might never see it again. 

He then produced copies of treaties made in 1701 as, 
an evidence of the friendly relations of their ancestors. 
He promised that the remainder of the prisoners would 
be brought into Fort Pitt in the spring which pledge was 
kept. Many of the captives had become so fond of In- 
dian life that it was with difficulty that they could be in- 
duced to return to Christian homes. McCullough, one of 
the captives in his narrative says that Rhoda Boyd and 
Elizabeth Studibaker escaped from the whites and went 
back to the Indians. Mary Jemison, who had married 
among them, fled with her half-breed children and hid 
until the troops left the country. 

This would indicate that after their adoption captives 
was as a rule treated kindly and as members of their own 
families by their Indian captors. 

One of the Virginia volunteers had lost his wife and a 
child two years old in an Indian foray into the settlement 
six months before. What transports filled their hearts 
when he met her with a babe three months old at her 
breast ! Quickly he took her to his tent, and furnished 
suitable clothing for her and her babe. But what had 
become of the two-year-old darling captured with its 



70 COL, HENRY BOUQUET 

mother ? She could not tell, except that it had been sep- 
arated from her and taken elsewhere after their captivity. 
A few days later a child was brought, in which was sup- 
posed to be the one in question. The mother was sent 
for, and at first was not certain that it was her child, but 
after carefully scrutinizing it she recognized its features, 
and was so overcome with joy that she dropped her young 
babe and, catching up the newly found child, she clasped 
it to her heart, and with a flood of tears carried it off. 
The father, picking up the child that she had let fall, fol- 
lowed his overjoyed wife and thus again the family circle 
was unbroken. The rough soldiers, and even the stolid 
savages were moved to feelings of sympathetic tenderness 
by such touches of human nature, which make the whole 
world of mankind akin. 

November i8, the army set out for Fort Pitt, followed 
by many affectionate Indians, who sought to help the cap- 
tives along in their homeward journey. In ten days the 
fort was reached just in time to escape severe winter 
weather. The regular troops ( Highlanders and Royal 
Americans ), were placed at the different forts and posts 
on the line of communication, while the volunteers re- 
turned with the captives to the provinces. Those captives, 
whose friends had not been able to go with the army, were 
taken to Carlisle, where many persons who had lost chil- 
dren by the Indians, flocked to discover, if possible, their 
captured kindred. One German woman, from East Penn- 
sylvania, came in search of a daughter, who had been 
carried off nine years before. She identified one of the 
young female captives as her long lost child, but could 
gain no token of recognition in response to her loving en- 
treaties. The old lady lamented that the child that she 
had often sung to sleep on her knee had forgotten her in 
her old age. Bouquet, like a man of sense and humane 
instincts, told the woman to sing one of the songs or 
hymns that she used to sing to her when a child. Mrs. 
Hartman, the mother, obeyed as best she could, singing 
part of a very appropriate German hymn, of which I will 
give several verses, together with a translation by Rev. 
Samuel R. Fisher, D. D., deceased. 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 7 1 

Allein und doch nicht gantz alleine 

Bin ich in meiner einsamkeit, 
Dann wann ich gantz verlassen scheine, 

Vertreibt mir Jesus selbst die zeit. 
Ich bin bey Ihm, und Er bey mir, 
So kommt nun gar nich einsam flir. 

Alone and yet not all alone 

Am I, in solitude though drear, 
For when no one seems me to own 

My Jesus will himself be near. 
I am with Him and He with me, 
I, therefore, cannot lonely be. 

Komm ich zur welt ; man redt von sachen, 
So nur auf eitlekeit gericht ; 

Da muss sich lassen das verlachen, 
Der etwas von den Himmel spricht. 

Drum wunsh ich lieber gantz allein, 

Als bey der welt ohn Gott zu seyn. 
Seek I the world ? Of things they speak, 

Which are on vanity intent; 
Here he is scorned and spurned as weak 

Whose mind on heavenly things is bent. 
I rather would my lone way plod, 
Than share the world without my God. 

Verkehrte konnen leicht verkehren, 
Wer greifet pech ohn kleben an ? 

Wie solt ich dann dahin begehren. 
Wo man Gott bald vergessen kann ? 

Gesellschaft, die verdachtig sheint, 

Wird ofters nach dein fall beweint. 
With ease do perverts perverts make ; 

Who handles pitch his hands will soil ; 
Why then should I with those partake, 

Who of His honor God despoil ? 
Society which we suspect, 

We often afterwards reject. 

******** 

Wer wolte dann nun recht erkennen. 

Das ich stets in gesellschaft bin? 
Und will die welt mich einsam nennen. 

So thun sie es nur immerhin. 
G'nug, dass bey mir, wann ich allein, 
Gott und viel tausend engel seyn. 



s-. ^^, \ 



IIA«d 



72 COL. HENR Y BOUQ UET 

Who will not then with candor own, 

I have companions all I crave ? 
And will the world still deem me lone ? 
. Then let it thus forever rave. 
Enough ! I've God and angels' host, 
Whose number can its thousands boast. 

The sweet accents of her German childhood, fell upon 
her enraptured ears like the song of angels, and with a 
gaze of fond recognition, and a passionate flood of tears, 
the long lost daughter rushed into the outstretched arms 
of her devoted mother. 

Scenes like this threw a halo of religious romance 
around the expedition of Bouquet. Rev. Ruben Weiser 
has drawn out the story of Regina Hartman, the German 
captive, with confessedly large drafts upon the imagina- 
tion. He draws Conrad Weiser into the drama, although 
the great Indian interpreter had already been dead four 
years ! This is not more absurd than to foist in a German 
hostler to interpret between Mrs. Hartman and Col Bou- 
quet, who was well acquainted with German, French, &c., 
or his efforts to make Regina pass through a certain re- 
ligious process. 

Peace and tranquility were restored to the borders 
without bloodshed, and hundreds of captives were brought 
back from heathen bondage to blessings of Christian 
homes and civilization. Bouquet was the hero of the 
hour. Early in January, 1765, he arrived in Philadelphia. 
The people and authorities everywhere vied with each 
other in expressing their highest esteem for his character, 
and grateful recognition of his services. The friends and 
relatives especially of recovered captives were filled with 
affectionate and reverent admiration. 

PUBLIC THANKS TO BOUQUET. 

January 15, 1765, the Assembly of Pennsylvania at its 
first setting, adopted a congratulatory and complimentary 
address, heartily thanking him for his great service to that 
province, by his victory at Bushy Run, Aug, 6, 1763, his re- 
cent campaign against the Ohio Indians, during which he 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 73 

had laid the foundation of lasting peace and rescued hun- 
dreds of Christian brethern from savage captivity ; and, 
finally, they thanked him for his " constant attention to 
the civil rights of his Majesty's subjects in this province." 

In like manner the House of Burgesses for the Colony 
and Dominion of Virginia, thanked Bouquet for his inval- 
uable services in subduing the Indians, and recovering so 
many of their people from captivity. 

They further requested the Governor to recommend Bou- 
quet to the ministers of King George, as an officer of dis- 
tinguished merit, in this and every former service in 
which he had been engaged. The gallant and chivalric 
Colonel replied in grateful acknowledgment and gener- 
ously awarded much of the credit of the success of his re- 
cent campaign to the efficiency of the provincial troops, 
and especially commended Col. Lewis for his zeal and 
good conduct during the campaign. Col. Reid, who was 
second in command, also received honorable mention 
from him as well as all officers, regular and provincial, who 
served in the expedition. 

INJUSTICE AND INGRATITUDE OF VIRGINIA. 

But every sweet has its bitter, and the oft-told tale of in- 
gratitude and injustice to benefactors must, alas, be re- 
peated. Virginia was lavish in her praises, as well she 
might be, for she had profited greatly by the campaign ; 
but when it came to foot the bill of expenses for her 
small body of splendid troops during the campaign, she 
repudiated the obligation ! " Tell it not in Gath, publish 
it not in the streets of Askelon !" Pontiac, the heathen 
savage, put such conduct to shame by scrupulously re- 
deeming every piece of birch bark currency issued in his 
name for supplies during the siege of Detroit. 

At length, after great personal annoyance and embar- 
rassment, Bouquet induced the Pennsylvania Assembly to 
pay the Virginia troops for services and expenses incurred 
during the campaign of 1764. 

By so doing Pennsylvania in some degree atoned for a 
multitude of past sins of neglect and indifference. But 

D 




74 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

Bouquet was stung to the quick by the conduct of the 
Virginians, and begs Gen. Gage to relieve him from his 
present command in order that he might make a trip to 
Europe. His request was granted. He wrote to Gage 
March 4, 1765, "the disgust I have conceived from the 
ill-nature and ingratitude of those individuals (the Vir- 
ginia officials) makes me accept with great satisfaction your 
offer to discharge me of this department, in which I never 
desire to serve again, nor, indeed, to be commanding offi- 
cer in any other, since the new regulations you were 
pleased to communicate to me ; being sensible of my in- 
ability to carry on the service upon the terms prescribed." 

This had reference to some rigid prescriptions which he 
supposed fully closed the door against the promotion of 
foreign born officers. 

He seems to have intended to return and settle in the 
provinces, or remove obstacles in the line of promotion, 
for the day before writing the above letter to Gage, i. e., 
March 3, 1765, he was naturalized by the Supreme Court 
of Pennsylvania, in accordance with a late act of Parlia- 
ment. 

bouquet's promotion. 

And now to his great surprise and the gratification of all 
good men, Bouquet receives tidings that the King had 
promoted him to the rank of brigadier general. 

April 15, 1765, he wrote his grateful acknowledgment of 
the unexpected honor, which also gave assurance of prefer- 
ment to other deserving foreign-born officers, who were 
among the most devoted subjects of the King. Letters of 
congratulation came pouring in, especially from officers 
who had served under him. 

Capt. George Etherigton, of the first battallion of Royal 
Americans, who so narrowly escaped massacre at Michill- 
mackinac in May, 1763, wrote Bouquet as follows from 
Lancaster, Pa., April 19, 1765: "Sir, though I almost 
despair of this reaching you before you sail to Europe, 
yet I cannot deny myself the pleasure of giving you joy 
on your promotion, and can, with truth, tell you that it 
gives great joy to all the gentlemen of the battallion, for 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 75 

two reasons : first, on your account ; and secondly, on. our 
own, as by that means we may hope for the pleasure of 
continuing under your command. You can hardly imagine 
how this place rings with the news of your promotion, for 
the townspeople and German farmers stop us in the street 
to ask if it is true that the king has made Col. Bouquet a 
general ; and when they are told it is true, they march off 
with great joy ; so you see the old proverb wrong for once, 
which says he that prospers is envied ; for sure I am that 
all the people are more pleased with the news of your 
prornotion than they would be if the government would 
take off the stamp duty." 

Dr. Wm. Smith, Provost of the University and historian 
of his campaigns, spoke the common sentiment when he 
said Bouquet had become " as dear by his private virtues 
to those who have the honor of his more intimate acquain- 
tance as he is by his military service to the public." For 
this reason " it is hoped he may long continue among us, 
where his experienced abilities will enable him, and his 
love of the English constitution entitle him, to fill any 
future trust to which his Majesty may be pleased to call 
him." 

It had been Bouquet's hope and desire to visit England 
and to return again to the scenes of his earlier career 
among the Lowlands of Holland and the mountains of 
Switzerland, but the king assigned him to the command of 
the Southern military department, and as the Indians had 
recently become troublesome in that locality, he repaired 
to his new field of action without unnecessary delay. 

LEAVES FOR PENSACOLA. WILL AND DEATH. 

Before leaving Philadelphia he made his last will and 
testament, which I copied a few weeks ago at the office of 
the Register of Wills, in Philadelphia. It is in his own 
handwriting, and reads thus: " In the name of God, Amen. 
I, Henry Bouquet, Brigadier General of his Majesty's 
forces, serving in North America, have thought fit to 
dispose of my estate, real and personal, after my death, 
in the following manner : I give and bequeath for the use 
of the Hospital of Pennsylvania, forty pounds of that cur- 



76 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

rency. I give and bequeath to my friend, Thos. Willing, 
Esq., five tracts of land of two hundred acres each, sur- 
veyed or to be surveyed for me in Trough Creek Valley, by 
virtue of the warrants granted me at the land office, and 
now to the amount of thirteen, including one to be given 
by Geo. Croghan, Esq., in the hands of Mr. Robert Cal- 
lendar, living near Carlisle, in Cumberland county ; amount- 
ing in the whole to two thousand eight hundered acres, for 
which I paid only the warrant money. I give and be- 
queath to John Schneider, the boy who is bound to me, 
the sum of fifty pounds currency to be paid him when he 
is of age by Col. Haldimand, to whom I recommend my 
other servants. All my just debts are to be paid, consist- 
ing at present in one thousand pounds sterling, besides in- 
terests to Mr. G. Heneman, solicitor of the Swiss troops 
at the Hague in Holland' — in my note in hand to account 
current with Mr. Adam Hoops, the note being for two hun- 
dred and fifty pounds being without interest — in a bond 
upon mortgage to Mr. Roberts for the sum of one thousand 
pounds currency with interest. I give and bequeath to my 
father, if then living, or after him, to Col. Lewis Bouquet, 
and to his heirs all the effects of any nature, whatsoever, 
which I may be possessed of in the continent of Europe, 
without exception. I constitute and appoint my friend. 
Col. Frederick Haldimand, my heir and executor, and to 
him I give and bequeath all and everything which 1 may 
die possessed of in North America, without any excep- 
tion whatever, upon the condition of paying my just debts 
and above legacies. My estate, consisting for the present 
in the farm called Long Meadows enlarged, situate in Fred- 
erick county, in the Province of Maryland. [Bouquet re- 
ceived the grant for this estate Sept. i6, 1763. It con- 
tained, as owned by him, 4,163 acres of very valuable land. 
Frederick county, Maryland, at that time included Wash- 
ington county, within whose present limits the estate was 
located near the Pennsylvania line.] The deeds whereof 

are now in the possession of the above named, 

Roberts. The said farm to be sold with the saw-mill, tan 
yard, houses, tenement and appurtenances on the same for 
the payment of my debts and legacies — in the eighteen 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 77 

hundred acres of land above mentioned, to be surveyed 
for me in this Province and remaining after deducting the 
five tracts given to Mr. Willing — in my share of the She- 
pody lands if then in my possession — in my apparel, bag- 
gage, furniture, stores, &c., in my pay and arrears which 
may be due me at my death — in my share of the Carolina 
Plantation after the accounts are fully settled between 
Messrs. Guinand and the others concerned, all of which I 
bequeath to Col. Haldimand, and I hereby annul and de- 
clare void, and of no effect, any other will which I may at 
any time have made previous to this day, as this present will 
and testament contains my last and real intentions and 
disposition, and is to take place accordingly. In witness 
whereof, I have wrote, (written) signed with my own hand 
and affixed my seal to this last will and testament, in the 
City of Philadelphia, in Pennsylvania, this twenty-fifth day 
of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hun- 
dred and sixty five. Henry Bouquet. 

Signed, sealed, published and declared by the testator 
as his last will and testament in our presence who sub- 
scribed the same as witnesses in his presence and at his 
request. Benjamin Chew, 

Jo. Turner, 
Thos. Turner. 

The will was probated Nov. i, 1765, on oath of the 
Turners, the other witness, Mr. Chew, being the register 
general. Soon after this and evidently with a good deal 
of reluctance, Gen. Bouquet set out for his new station at 
Pensacola, where he arrived Aug. 23, 1765, in the deadliest 
season of the year, and at once fell a victim to the fever 
so fatal to unacclimated persons. The following extract 
from the Pennsylvania Magazine for Thursday October 
24, 1765, tells the sad story : "On Tuesday last arrived 
the sloop William, Capt. Rivers, in thirty-six days from 
Pensacola, by whom we learn ten sail of transports with 
troops (to relieve those on that station that are going 
home) arrived there, and that there has been a great mor- 
tality among them, ten or twelve dying of a day, amongst 
which was the gallant and worthy officer. Brigadier Gen. 



7 8 COL. HENR Y BOUQ UET 

Bouquet. This gentleman had served his Majesty all the 
last war with great distinction. He was promoted from 
conscious merit not only unenvie.d, but even with the ap- 
probation and good wishes of all who knew him. His 
superior judgment and knowledge of military matters, his 
experienced abilities, known humanity, remarkable po- 
liteness and constant attention to the civil rights of his 
Majesty's subjects, rendered him an honor to his country 
and a loss to mankind. He arrived the 23d of August, 
and died September 2." Thus in the midst of his grow- 
ing fame and in the full vigor of manhood this superb 
man, who had faced death unscathed a thousand times 
in the forests and thickets of Pennsylvania, met his un- 
timely end from insidious disease, just as he was about to 
begin his career on a new theatre of action in the far dis- 
tant south. 

He died universally regretted, and his character and ex- 
ample were commended by contemporary writers as worthy 
of imitation by young officers who desired to win a lasting 
fame in the public service. He sleeps in a soldier's grave, 
far from home and kindered, far from those who knew 
him but to love him. But warm and grateful hearts in 
the North land cherished his memory and fame with fond 
affection 118 years ago. And although for a time oblivi- 
on's waves seemed to have almost engulfed him, yet we 
see the dawn of a brighter day and feel assured that the 
fame of Bouquet will shine forth bright and beautiful as 
in days of yore. In the forum of all grateful hearts, 
among the descendants of Colonial ancestors or pioneer 
settlers, a monument deserves to be erected to the memory 
of Henry Bouquet more enduring than Parian marble or 
Corinthian brass. Reverently and gratefully I pay him 
this tribute, and would that it were indeed an amaranthine 
chaplet to adorn and perpetuate his memory, yea to call 
forth the homage of the good, the brave and the true, as 
the centuries go marching down the corridors of time. 

bouquet's grave unknown. 

Bouquet's grave at Pensacola is unmarked and unknown. 
During the past ten months very thorough researches have 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 79 

been made by the military authorities on the Gulf, but all 
in vain, as the subjoined letters indicate. 

War Department, Adjutant General's Office, \ 
Washington, February 13, 1883. J 

My Dear Sir : Your letter of the 9th inst. enclosing one ad- 
dressed to our Minister at Great Britain, has been received. It 
affords me great pleasure to aid you all I can in this matter, and 
I have accordingly submitted your letter to Mr. Lowell, to the 
Hon. the Secretary of War, for transmission to the Secretary 
of State for such action as may be consistent with public interests. 

Referring to your inquiry of the 9tb ult. , respecting the re- 
•nains of Bouquet, I regret to inform you, that the commanding 
officer at Fort Barrancas, Fla., to whom your request was re- 
ferred, reports under the date of the 7th instant, that he has 
made search and inquiry in Pensacola regarding the whereabouts 
of Gen. Bouquet's remains, but has not been able to learn any- 
thing about them. He further states that the oldest cemetery at 
Pensacola was commenced in 1780, and that those best posted in 
the matter have informed him that all the cemeteries at that 
place were destroyed prior to 1780, and that there is no trace of 
them left. 

The old cemeteries at Pensacola were probably destroyed in 
1 78 1, when that town was besieged and taken by the Spanish 
General Galvez. 

I will make further inquiries regarding Bouquet's remains and 
apprise you of the result. Yours very truly, 

R. C. Drum, 
Rev. Cyrus Cort, Adjutatit General, 

Greencastle, Franklin County, Pa. 

War Department, Adjutant General's Office, \ 
Washington, March 21, 1883. j 

Dear Sir : I have received General Hancock's answer to my 
inquiries regarding Bouquet's remains. 

He informs me that upon the receipt of my letter he referred 
it to several officers who have been stationed at Fort Barrancas, 
Fla., for any information or suggestions they might have in this 
matter ; that they named certain persons who, they thought, 
could probably furnish the desired information, but that all efforts 
in that direction have thus far proved to be unsuccessful. 

The commanding officer of Fort Barrancas again visited Pen- 
sacola, with a view of obtaining some information of the remains 



8o COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

of Bouquet, supposed to have be buried there. He interviewed k 
number of gentlemen, old residents of that town, and states thit 
none of them have ever heard of Bouquet. 

He also searched the old cemetery, which was deeded by the 
Spanish to the Catholic church in 1781, but without success, and 
finally states that — unfortunately — the records of the cemetery as 
well as those of the Catholic church, were destroyed by fire last 
summer, and regrets to state that it is impossible to gain any in- 
formation at Pensacola regarding the whereabouts of Bouquets 
remains. I am, yours very truly, { 

R. C. Drum, ' 

The Rev. Cyrus Cort, Adjutant Genera!. 

Greencastle, Franklin County, Pa. 

General Drum has shown great zeal and persistency ir. 
this research. He has always manifested deep interest in 
the character and career of Col. Bouquet, and as a West- 
morelander of old and honored lineage, he is anxious to 
have justice done to the hero of Bushy Run. It remains 
for the present generation to mark aright the field of Bou- 
quet's greatest triumph by a monument as lasting as the 
hills which were consecrated by the blood and valor of his 
heroic soldiers. Appropos to this part of my subject I 
will append a poem, which was written in a freight car on 
the Iowa prairies, whilst the writer was transporting his 
horse and household goods from one field of pastoral labor 
to another, Nov. 19, 1880, the thermometer being several 
degrees below zero. 

Bouquet's Grave. 

He sleeps in an unknown grave. 

In a far away land. 

By the South Sea strand, 
Bouquet sleeps the sleep of the brave. 

Sleep on. Oh son of the free ! 

Where the blood of the Scot, 

From the field where you fought, 
Ran down to the boundless sea. 

Ah ! was it not grandly meet. 

That the gallant Bouquet, 

In that land far away. 
Should lie where the surges beat. 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 8 1 

Oh Sea ! be an urn for the men. 

And a requiem bell 

For the hero who fell, 
Till the muse shall be grateful again. 

Alas ! 'Tis a burning shame, 

That the Keystone state 

Should be tardy or late 
To cherish the Switzer's fame. 

Redeemed were your woody hills 

By the Swiss and the Scot, 

Let them ne'er be forgot 
While valor the bosom thrills. 

Awake ! Ye sons of the North ! 

And the deeds of these men 

Clasp to your hearts again. 
And fondly cherish their worth. 

Oh, land of the brave and free ! 

Bright as the noonday sun, 

Long as your streams shall run 
Let the fame of the Switzer be. 

A MONUMENT DUE BOUQUET, 

In an article written for Frank Cowan's paper, on the 
Bushy Run battle, nearly eleven years ago, I asked the 
question " does not Westmoreland county, yea all Western 
Pennsylvania owe a monument to Henry Bouquet ?" In my 
centennial speech at Hannastown, a year ago, I enlarged 
upon the same thought and, I trust, that in the Providence 
of God, I may see the day when the dear old county of 
my nativity will thus honor herself, as well as the grand 
hero who has made her* soil historic ground. All public 
spirited people should aid in such a work. It will stimu- 
late the young to emulate one who, amid perils and priva- 
tions, by sterling merit and conscientious fidelity to duty, 
rose from obscurity to become the peer of the greatest and 
best. 

It will help to demonstrate that no flight of years or 
changes of human governments and institutions, can oblit- 
erate the memory of genuine worth and true manhood, as 
illustrated in the history of Henry Bouquet. 



82 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

With Pericles, as amplified by Edward Everett at Get- 
tysburg, we may say of illustrious men " The whole 
earth is their sepulchre and all time themilleniumof their 
glory." Wherever heroic deeds have been done, wher- 
ever the battles of human civilization have been fought and 
won, that is hallowed ground, full of deepest interest to 
every thoughtful, true-hearted man. 

'' These are the shrines to code nor creed confined 
The Delphian vales, the Palestine, the Meccas of the mind." 

Bushy Run battlefield ought to be, and I feel assured 
will be looked upon, in years to come, as such a shrine. 
Here savage barbarism, as represented by Pontiac and 
Guyasutha, two of its noblest representatives, met the 
vanguard of civilization, culture and progress, under the 
matchless leadership of Bouquet. Here, too, was fought 
and won the battle which virtually established the supre- 
macy of the Anglo Saxon race, in the great valley of the 
Mississippi. 

'' The land is holy where they fought 
And holy where they fell." 

Not by British blood and valor /^r se^ but by Swiss and 
Scot, Royal Americans, Provincials and Highlanders from 
Caledonia hills, by these other branches of the great Teu- 
tonic host, the Aryan or Indo-Germanic family of nations, 
was this typical battle fought and won 120 years ago. 

It is meet that the German-Swiss and Scotch-Irish ele- 
ments should possess this goodly land, as they do this day, 
forming the bone and sinew of Westmoreland's sterling 
population. 

And it is meet that they should not forget the pit out of 
which they have been dug, nor the rock from which they 
have been hewn. 

The toils and privations of our colonial ancestors should 
be held in grateful and everlasting remembrance. They 
braved the perils of old ocean and of life in the Western 
wilderness, amid savage beasts and more savage men, for 
the sake of religious principle, and that their children 
might be freeholders and freemen in the best sense of the 
term. Let us prize the precious birthright as something 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 83 

more precious than silver or gold. " Man shall not live 
by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of 
the mouth of God." Ideas, principles, sentiments cultivat- 
ing a pure and progressive Christian manhood, are of vastly 
more account than the filthy lucre, on which so many set 
their hearts. The scenery and associations of childhood 
and youth are educational. They stamp their impress 
upon the soul for weal or for woe. Inspiring historical 
treasures are beyond all price. Many are the lines of 
thought and currents of history that centre in and around 
the honorable and eventful career of Henry Bouquet. As 
good men did in days of old, so now would I commend 
his as a character and example worthy of study and imi- 
tation by the young and all entrusted with official posi- 
tions. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS. 

Bouquet willed a large tract of land in Trough Valley, 
( Huntingdon or Mifflin Co., Pa.,) to Mr. Thos. Willing. 
This was a brother of Miss Annie Willing, hie fair corres- 
pondent. His extensive Long Meadows estate in Maryland 
lay a few miles north or north-east of Hagerstown, Md., 
and is now owned by the Lehmans, Willems, Cresslers, 
and others. 

Col. Haldimand, his legatee, and executor, was his 
special Swiss compatriot and military comrade. He fig- 
ured somewhat in the Revolutionary War, and became 
governor-general of Canada, from which post he retired in 
1785, to die in his native Switzerland. Many of Bou- 
quet's most valuable papers are included among those of 
Haldimand, at present, in the British Museum. The time 
to write a complete biography of the man has not yet ar- 
rived. 

Mr. G. D. Scull, of Philadelphia, residing at Oxford, 
England, expects to publish a very limited edition of some 
of these papers during the ensuing year. He claims that 
on one occasion Bouquet saved Philadelphia from sack 
and pillage, the proof of which will doubtless appear in 
his book. I had hoped to be able to refer to this proposed 
publication in the preparation of this sketch, but have been 
disappointed. 



84 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

PONTIAC'S SUBMISSION. 

Pontiac, for a season remained defiant, even after his 
confederates had submitted to the terms of Bouquet. 
When Capt. Morris went to him with proposals of peace, 
he met him on the outskirts of his camp, and refused to 
take his hand. With flashing eye, he exclaimed, " The 
English are liars." And yet he spared the captain's life, 
as he afterwards did that of I.ieut. Fraser, Mr. Croghan, 
and other peace envoys, although his warriors were anxious 
to slay them. He sought the country of the Illinois, with 
400 warriors, where the flag of France still floated, as it 
had done since the days of La Salle, Tonti, &c., in 1680. 

He urged the different tribes to rise again and fight 
for the preservation of their race, and threatened to de- 
stroy those who shirked. French traders had all along 
led him to expect aid from their great King. At length, 
he was fully convinced, by replies of French officers, in 
response to his embassies sent to Fort Chartres and New 
Orleans, that all hope of help from that quarter was vain. 
He then gave up the contest, and agreed to meet with 
other confederates at the great council, held by Sir Wm. 
Johnson, to arrange definitely the terms of peace, secured 
by the campaigns of Bouquet. 

Croghan, who met him repeatedly and experienced his 
magnanimity in restraining warriors who were anxious to 
kill the British peace-agent, speaks thus of the great 
Ottawa chieftain : " Pontiac is a shrewd, sensible Indian, 
of few words, and commands more respect among his own 
nation than any Indian I ever saw could do among his 
own tribe." 

Late in the fall of 1765 Capt. Sterling descended the 
Ohio in boats, and passed up the Mississippi with one 
hundred Highlanders of the 42d regiment to Fort Chartres, 
of which he took formal possession in the name of Great 
Britain. 

It was fitting that "those veterans whose battle cry," 
as Parkman says, " had echoed over the bloodiest fields 
of America," should consummate on the banks of the 
Father of Waters the work begun at Bushy Run, and es- 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 85 

tablish forever Anglo-Saxon supremacy in the new world. 
In due time Pontiac appeared at the great council held 
by Sir Wm. Johnson during the latter part of July, 1766. 
The following are the opening sentences of his speech: 
" Father, we thank the Great Spirit for giving us so fine a 
day to meet upon such great affairs. I speak in the name 
of all the nations to the westward, of whom I am the 
master. It is the will of the Great- Spirit that we should 
meet here to-day ; and before him I now take you by the 
hand. I call him to witness that I speak from the heart ; 
for since I took Col. Croghan by the hand last year, I 
have never let go my hold, for I see that the Great Spirit 
will have us friends." 

PONTIAC'S ASSASSINATION AND ITS EXPIATION. 

Everything was amicably adjusted at the council, and 
Pontiac, with many presents, returned to the Maumee, 
where he spent one season. He afterwards seems to have 
located in the region of the Illinois Indians, who were 
jealous of his presence, and who approved of his assassi- 
nation. Accounts differ in regard to this affair, Mr. 
Parkman adopts the Cahokia theory i. e., that Pontiac 
was killed at that place by an Illinois Indian who had 
been bribed to do the foul deed by Williamson, an Eng- 
lish trader, who feared that Pontiac, while on a drunken 
spree, was about to stir up trouble against the English, 
and thus interfere with his traffic. Mr. Matson contends 
that Pontiac was fatally stabbed by Kineboo, the chief of 
the Illinois Indians at a council, held near Joliet, in that 
state. 

One thing is certain, the Illinois Indians were held re- 
sponsible for his assassination. All the tribes that in 
former days had felt the magic spell of his eloquence and 
had responded to his bugle call, now leagued together to 
avenge the death of Pontiac by a war of extermination 
against the Illinois Indians. 

The follov/ing extract I take from an article which I 
prepared for the Guardian for August, 18S2, on the basis 
of Matson's theory : 



86 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

" Runners were sent to the Winnebagos, of the North, and 
the Kickapoos, of the South-west, who agreed to help avenge the 
death of the great Pontiac. Over the remains a council was 
held by the allies, who swore by the great Manito of war not to 
lay down the tomahawk until the fallen chieftain's death should 
be avenged by the destruction of the Illinois Indians, who abetted 
the cowardly deed of Kineboo. The Miamis united with the 
tribes already mentioned, and Bernet, the white outlaw, also 
with a band of warriors, joined in the bloody strife. The com- 
bined forces made the most formidable Indian army ever collected 
in the West. Death and annihilation to the Illinois was the sav- 
age oath of the ferocious avengers. The smaller towns along 
the Illinois river were first destroyed, and finally La Vantum, 
their great capital, which was defended by their bravest warriors, 
was suddenly assaulted. The skull and cross bones of Pontiac 
were borne on a red pole by the avengers. Their first attack 
met with a bloody repulse. A council of war was called by the 
invaders, at which the leading war chiefs, with fiery eloquence, 
advocated that nothing short of extermination of the Illinoisans 
would meet the demands of the case or be acceptable to the great 
Manito of war. The Illinois warriors had spent much of the 
night in dancing and premature rejoicing over the repulse of the 
assailants, and were taken by surprise in the morning. After 
terrific carnage, the allies were again repulsed with great slaugh- 
ter. But again and again they returned with reinforcements to 
the conflict. Thus for twelve long hours the carnival of death 
went on in and around La Vantum, the great Indian city of the 
West. Night came on, and still the battle raged, until a heavy 
rain storm put an end to hostihties. During the darkness and 
storm the Ilhnois Indians crossed the Illinois river in their canoes 
and ascended Starved Rock, the old site of Fort St. Louis, where 
Tonti had so signally repulsed the Iroquois. Here the remnant 
of 1 200 Illinois Indians, including 300 warriors, rallied and 
thought themselves secure. But the allied forces, not content 
with the destruction of the town and other property of the Illi- 
nois, quickly surrounded the Rock, determined to avenge the 
death of Pontiac by the complete annihilation of all who in any 
way approved of his assassination. With ferocious yells they rushed 
up the rugged pathway on the only accessible side of the rocky 
summit. But brave and desperate Illinois warriors, with war 
clubs and tomahawks, sent them bleeding and mangled down 
the steep declivity. Again and again did the fierce avengers 
attempt to storm the almost impregnable heights. Many were 
slain as soon as they reached the summit, and hurled over the 
precipice into the river below. After losing many of their brav- 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 87 

est warriors, the allies gave up the assault and began the slow 
and tedious work of starving out the besieged Illinoisans. At 
the time of the attack upon the town a French and Indian half- 
breed warrior, named Belix, who had greatly distinguished him- 
self in previous battles, was being married to the beautiful daugh- 
ter of Chief Kineboo. When the assault was made upon the 
Rock, Behx stood foremost and most valliant among the defend- 
ers, and with his war-club dealt death-blows upon many of the 
assailants. His bride stood near by to encourage her gallant 
lord, but when she saw him fall with skull cloven by a tomahawk, 
she uttered a wild scream and sprang over the Rock, falling from 
crag to crag until her lifeless body dropped into the river below. 
Fifty-one years had elapsed since the rock had been abandoned 
by the French, and the palisades and earth-works afforded but 
little protection against sharp-shooters who took possession of 
neighboring cliffs and joined in a galling fire upon the Illinois. 
Kineboo, whose rash and dastardly act had precipitated the war, 
was killed in this way. But soon a rampart, sufficient to ward off 
bullets was erected bj the besieged along the exposed edges of 
the precipices. But the worst enemy now began to assail them. 
Hunger began to gnaw at their vitals with remorseless tooth. The 
small supply of provisions, brought along in their flight from La 
Vantum, were soon exhausted. The Rock of refuge became an 
altar of sacrifice, of whole burnt offering, to the IlHnois in the 
end ; for their relentless foes never relaxed in the siege until the 
last Illinois but one had perished. A warrior, the solitary excep- 
tion, let himself down by a buckskin cord into the river on a 
dark and stormy night and escaped, but all the rest, — warriors, 
squaws and pappooses perished. Some of the squaws, in the de- 
lirium of hunger and thirst, would spring with their infants into 
the river. Warriors would make a sortie only to be slain or 
driven back by the merciless avengers. Some feasted on the 
dead. The death-song was chanted, and at last, when a final 
assault was made, only a few feeble survivors remained to be 
tomahawked. Thus perished the once powerful and arrogant 
Illinois, and thus terribly was the assassination of the great Pon- 
tiac avenged. Great must have been the magnetism of the man 
in life and death who marshalled the conspiracy which nearly 
drove the English east of the AUeghenies, and which combined 
the savage hosts of the lakes and the prairies to expiate "the 
deep damnation of his taking off" by a holocaust that is unpar- 
alleled even in the history of savage warfare and retaliation. 
Well may the old site of Fort St. Louis, on the Illinois river, 
near Ottawa, Illinois, the scene of the first white settlement in 
the Mississippi valley, two hundred years ago, be called Starved 



8S COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

Rock, in commemoration of that closing tragedy and catastrophe 
in the history of the great tribe whose name is perpetuated not 
only by the river along which they roved, fished and hunted, 
and fought their numerous foes, but also by the title of one of 
the greatest and most prosperous states in the American Union." 

Thus was expiated the death .of Pontiac, over whose 
grave, as Parkman says, " more blood was poured out in 
atonement than flowed from the veins of the slaughtered 
heroes on the corpse of Patroclus." 

Let justice be done to the memory of the man who broke 
the eastern wing of the great conspiracy at Bushy Run, 
Aug. 6, 1763, and rolled back the advancing tide of savage 
barbarism. All honor to Colonel Henry Bouquet and his 
heroic army of deliverance, who consecrated by their 
blood and valor, the green hills of old Westmoreland and 
made them historic forever. 

WESTMORELAND COUNTY BEFORE AND DURING THE 
REVOLUTION. 

Westmoreland county was created by Pennsylvania pro- 
vincial authorities in 1773, and originally included all that 
part of the State west of Laurel Hill. A dozen other 
counties have since been created out of the same territory, 
so that for Western Pennsylvania it may be said that "Old 
Westmoreland" was the mother of counties. 

Hannastown, a hamlet a few miles north-east of Greens- 
burg, was the first county seat. Here justice was first 
dispensed, west of the Alleghenies, according to the civil 
code. William Crawford, afterwards burnt by the Indi- 
ans, was the first presiding justice, and Arthur St. Clair 
was the first prothonotary. The first court fixed the price 
of a gill of whiskey at four pence ; toddy, one shilling ; 
West India rum, six pence ; cider, per quart, one shilling 
six pence ; strong beer, per quart, sixpence. 

The jail was made of rough, unhewn logs. Punish- 
ments were fines, whipping, standing in pillory or stocks, 
cropping off ears and branding. 

Rape, sodomy, robbery, mahem, arson, burglary, witch- 
craft and concealing of a bastard child were punishable 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 89 

with death, as well as murder. Virginia set up rival 
claims to a large part of the territory included in West- 
moreland county, and created West Augusta county to 
cover it. Lord Dunmore, her Tory Governor, organized a 
court at Pittsburgh Feb. 21, 1775, to offset the claims of 
Pennsylvania. Dr. John Connolly, a resident of Pitts- 
burgh, was the Virginia agent, and representative of Dun- 
more. He published a manifesto Jan. i, 1774, inviting 
settlers to meet at Pittsburgh on the 25th proximo for con- 
ference, assuring them of the protection of Virginia. 

Arthur St, Clair, a justice of the peace of Westmore- 
land, issued a warrant and had Connolly arrested for a short 
time and confined in the log jail at Hannastown. Con- 
nolly, after his release, issued warrants and arrested the 
Westmoreland justices of the peace. The conflict con- 
tinued for about a year. Virginia's claims were recognized 
at Fort Pitt and in the Monongahela region. Yohogania 
county was created Nov. 30, 1776, out of part of Augusta 
and included the greater part of Alleghany and Washing- 
ton counties. Virginia courts were held for five years 
under these auspices. Virginia's price for lands being 
cheaper than those of Pennsylvania, the settlers in those 
regions generally sided with her in the dispute. At Bushy 
Run, Hannastown and Ligonier, with adjacent settlements, 
Pennsylvania interests and claims were upheld. This con- 
flict of jurisdiction caused great trouble 'and uneasiness, 
which was not allayed fully until the completion of the 
western end of Mason and Dixon's line, after the Revolu- 
tion. 

From the date of Bouquet's peace, dictated to the Indi- 
ans on the Muskingum, until the outbreak of the Revolu- 
tion, there was comparative peace and tranquility, so far 
as the Indians were concerned. The fur traders plied 
their lucrative traffic without molestation. The country 
began to fill up rapidly. When the VVar of Independence 
began, the sectional disputes were forgotten and a com- 
mon purpose was manifested to resist the encroachments 
of Great Britain. Hannastown has the honor of not only 
being the first seat of civil justice, west of the Alleghanies, 
but of leading the van in sounding the note of defiance in 



90 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

a formal public declaration of the sentiments that stirred 
the heart of the persecuted colonies. On the sixteenth of 
May, 1775, a convention was held at Hannastown, which 
denounced the acts of British usurpation and tyrrany, and 
took measures to provide for the common defence. 

Westmoreland was prompt in electing delegates, July 8, 
1776, to attend the convention, which met in Philadelphia, 
July 15, 1776, to lay the foundations of a government, 
"based on the authority of the people only." 

That convention included many of the best men of the 
state — wise in counsel, brave and energetic in action. Men 
like Franklin, Clymer, Hiester, and Rittenhouse. West- 
moreland sent as her delegates — James Barr, Edward 
Cook, James Smith, John Moore^ John Carmichael, James 
Perry, John McClellan and Christian Lavingair. 

Before taking their seats or casting their votes, they 

were required to subscribe to the following : " I, , 

do profess faith in God, the Father, and in Jesus Christ, 
His Eternal Son, the true God, and in the Holy Spirit, one 
God blessed forevermore ; and do acknowledge the Holy 
Scripture of the Old and New Testament to be given by 
divine inspiration." A very correct and orthodox profes- 
sion of the fundamental doctrines of Christianity. The 
convention adjourned September 28, 1776, after framing 
an excellent form of government, by the people and for 
the people. In fact, their work has formed the basis for 
all the state constitutions since adopted. 

And now came the horrors of war. To the everlasting 
disgrace and infamy of Great Britain, it must be said that 
she offered large bounties to cruel savages for the scalps 
of the frontier settlers, men, women and children. 

The British Governor, Hamilton, who had control at 
Detroit and along the northern frontiers, gave standing 
rewards for scalps, but offered none for prisoners. In 
consequence the Indians compelled the poor captives to 
carry their plunder to the immediate vicinity of Detroit, 
where, after having endured indescribable sufferings du- 
ring the journey through the wilderness, the poor crea- 
tures were put to death and scalped in cold blood to get 
the bounty. DePeyster, under orders from Haldimand, 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 9' 
acted more humanely as commandant at Detroit. He 
encouraged the Indians to bring in live meat, as the pris- 
oners from the borders were called, rather than scalps, 
which he did not like to see. In this way he saved 300 
frontier prisoners from a barbarous death. Prowling bands 
of savages continually ravaged the borders, and West- 
moreland was a favorite resort for the scalping parties. 
The old war path of the Catawbas and Cherokees from 
the south and southwest, with a tributary trail or path 
from Tennessee and Kentucky, went right through the 
heart of Westmoreland to the headwaters of the Susque- 
hanna, in western New York, where lived the Iroquois, or 
Six Nations, their inveterate enemies. After the conquest 
of the southern tribes by their powerful northern foes, they 
made periodical trips to pay tribute or show proper obeis- 
ance to the conquerors. 

The Mohawk Pluggy, located on the eastern branch of 
the Scioto, with a lawless and miscellaneous gang of ma- 
rauders, made frequent forays into the settlements along 
the Ohio and its branches. 

Generals Hand and Mcintosh, Col. Brodhead and Gen. 
Irvine commaded Fort Pitt during the Revolution, and 
although many expeditions were projected and a few 
abortive ones undertaken to carry the war into the Indian 
country, nothing serious was ever accomplished in that 
line to check the repeated incursions of the savages. Such 
a campaign and commander as carried terror to their 
hearts in their own native haunts in 1764, would have 
secured safety and tranquility to a large extent. But the 
desultory and fragmentary efforts put forth from time to 
time for aggressive movements against the savages and 
tories, as a rule only resulted in greater hardships for the 
frontier settlers. 

McKee, the Girty's and other tories who had grudge 
against the frontier settlers, led on the savage demons 
with great craft and daring against the .exposed frontiers. 

In April, 1778, a Westmorelander wrote, "God only 
knows what may be the fate of this county ; but at pres- 
ent it wears a dismal aspect." May i, 1779, another 
wrote, " The savages are continually making depredations 



92 COL, HENRY BOUQUET 

among us ; not less than forty people have been killed, 
wounded or captured this spring." A year later and the 
prospect was still more gloomy. Over forty settlers had 
been slain in the Monongahela region, and the raids were 
frequent from the northern Allegheny regions. " It really 
began to look," wrote Butterfield, " as though Westmoreland 
would again become a wilderness. The people, in a half 
starving condition, huddled in and about the forts and 
block-houses. The troops at Fort Pitt were ragged, un- 
paid, poorly fed, and of course discontented and inefficient. 
In August the Maryland corps deserted their posts on the 
frontier of Westmoreland, and in a body marched across 
the mountains. Lochry and his 150 picked men were 
surprised and destroyed in 1781. Crawford, another 
county official, met with terrible disaster and death in 
1782; and thus the chapter of horrors and frontier suf- 
fering goes on. Brodhead and some of his subordinate offi- 
cers got at loggerheads, and in the midst of quarrels 
among officers at Fort Pitt the work of desolation pros- 
pered. 

Gen. Irvine was appointed, but although many campaigns 
were talked about, none but such as Crawford's, William- 
son's, &c., badly managed affairs, were actualized. The 
main army was engaged in the last death grapples with 
the British Lion along the Atlantic coast, and the western 
settlers were largely left to the mercy of the savages. 

The British were emboldened even to fit out an expedi- 
tion to capture Fort Pitt. Three hundred British and 
Tories, and five hundred Indians, assembled with twelve 
pieces of artillery, on Lake Jadagua ( Chatauqua ), in 
1782, with this intention. Having learned, through a 
spy, that the fort was much stronger than had been sup- 
posed, the main object of the expedition was given up. 
The usual method of border warfare was then adopted, 
and marauding bands went into the different settlements. 
A feeling of unrest and apprehension pervaded the frontier. 
Many had been shot down and scalped, and prisoners 
carried off from the immediate vicinity of Forts Walthour, 
Klingensmith, &c. This sense of alarm found very timely 
and forcible representation in the petition of German set- 
tlers on Brush Creek, addressed to General Irvine, com- 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 93 

mander at Fort Pitt, June 22, 1782. It sets forth the de- 
spondency and distress of the people on account of 
continued calamities ( Crawford's fate had just been 
learned). They speak of the great peril attending the 
gathering of the harvest, nearly ripe, and beg for some 
troops to protect them as they seek to gather in the crops, 
which are needed to save them from famine — as much to 
be dreaded as the scalping knife. This petition was signed 
by ancestors of many living Westmorelanders, viz. : George, 
Christopher, Joseph and Michael Waldhauer ( Walthour,) 
Abraham and Joseph Studabedker, Michael and Jacob 
Byerly, John and Jacob Ruthdorf, Frederick Williard, 

Wiesskoph ( Whitehead ), Abram Schneider, Peter 

and Jacob Loutzenheiser, Hanover Davis, Conrad Zulten, 
Garret Pendegrast and John Kammerer. This petition is 
given by Butterfield, without the names of signers, on pages 
300-301, of his valuable book, " Washington Irvine Cor- 
respondence." 

ATTACK ON HANNASTQWN. 

Three weeks later, July 13, 1782, a large detachment of 
the aforesaid Chatauqua expedition burst upon Hannas- 
town, the county seat of Westmoreland. They burned 
the town, and came very near capturing the fort, into 
which a few of the frightened settlers, with Michael Huff- 
nagle, the prothonotary, at their head, had fled for safety. 
Captain Matthew Jack, by his courage and presence of 
mind, saved many lives on that disastrous day, as he rode 
gallantly from point to point, even through the encompass- 
ing lines of whooping savages. Miller's station, near by, 
was raided by the Indians, and the greater part of a wed- 
ding party was captured, including the wife and daughters 
of Robert Hanna. Captain Brownlee, and several others, 
were tomahawked, after being led captives a few miles. 
Dwellings were destroyed, together with many horses and 
cattle. The settlers were so terror-stricken that the 
ripened harvest was not gathered in many places, and 
great want ensued. Connolly, the renegade Tory, whom 
Gen. St. Clair had confined in the log jail at Hannastown, 
is supposed to have led this party, together with Guya- 
sutha, the famous Seneca chief. 



94 COL. HENRY BOUQUET 

About 20 persons were killed or captured in this foray. 
On the 13th of July, 1882, the centennial of this attack 
and repulse of the Indians and Tories at Hannastown, was 
celebrated by a large assemblage of Westmorelanders, in 
the woods near the old site of Hannastown. Hon. Jacob 
Turney presided, and made the opening address. Addresses 
were also made by Hon. Daniel Kane, Judge Bigham, Ex- 
Senator Cowan, and Rev. Cyrus Cort. 

RELIGIOUS CHARACTERISTICS OF EARLY SETTLERS. 

It is gratifying to know that amid their dangers and 
hardships, those Teutonic pioneers in old Westmoreland 
forgot not the God of their fathers. 

On May i, 1782, when the Reformed Coetus (Synod) 
met at Reading, Pa., a petition was received from " A 
congregation in Westmoreland county, near Pittsburg, in 
the back part of Pennsylvania, a new settlement, where 
no ministers have yet been." They " very earnestly en- 
treated for a good minister, to whom they promise to pay 
annually 80 pounds sterling, besides other necessaries of 
life." 

Rev. John William Weber, having expressed a willing- 
ness to go west and take charge of this mission enterprise, 
the Reverend Coetus recommended him and advised the 
Westmoreland people to give him a regular call. He ar- 
rived in Sept., 1782, and preached through what now 
constitutes Westmoreland, Washington and Fayette coun- 
ties, and at Fort Pitt, where the traveler Schopf met him in 
October, 1782. The congregations at Harolds and Brush 
Creek were organized a few months after Rev. Weber's 
arrival in Westmoreland. Here worshipped the Turneys, 
Drums, Barnharts, Marchands, Trubys, Mechlings, Kem- 
merers, Kifers, Klines, Byerlys, Whiteheads, Saams, Kling- 
ensmiths, Kunkles, Walthours, Baughmans, Thomases, 
Detars, Harrolds, Grosses, Henrys, Corts, Keppels, Kiehls, 
Shrums, Painters, and many other ancestors of Reformed 
and Lutheran families. 

Previous to the coming of Rev. Weber many of these 
German pioneers used to meet at the house of Loutzen- 
heiser and Davis to read the scriptures, sing the sweet 



AND HIS CAMPAIGNS. 95 

hymns of the German fatherland, hear a sermon read by 
some competent person, and engage in other religious ser- 
vices as best they could. 

They frequently carried their rifles with them, when 
they went to worship in the early days of Rev. Weber's 
ministry. Prowling savages lurked in the thickets for 
many years. Amid such perils and privations, those pio- 
neer settlers carved out homes for their children and 
turned the western wilderness of Penn's woods into a 
fruitful field. Surely a grateful posterity should honor 
their memory and rise up and call them blessed, while 
enjoying the goodly fruits of their pioneer toil. 

At a still earlier date the Scotch- Irish, led by pastors 
Finley, Power, McMillan, Dodd, Smith, &c., occupied the 
Sewickly and other settlements, and already in 1781 the 
old Redstone Presbytery was organized. " The incursions 
of savages " prevented the first meeting being held at 
Laurel Hill, the appointed place, and so it met at Pigeon 
Creek. 

It is meet, as already said, that the descendants of the 
hardy Scotch-Irish and German-Swiss should occupy the 
green hills and fertile valleys of old Westmoreland. By 
the blood and the sweat and the toil of their pioneer an- 
cestors, this goodly land has been rescued from savage 
barbarism. Hallowed be the memory of the brave men 
and women who nobly stood in the breach in the hour of 
trial and danger. 

Pennsylvania has been compared to a sleeping giant, 
not yet fully conscious of her vast power and resources. 
With unappreciated modesty, she has failed to assert her 
rights, and especially has she neglected to cherish aright 
the rich legacies of the past, bequeathed by an honest and 
patriotic ancestry. It behooves us to gather up the his- 
toric treasures that rightfully belong to our grand old 
Keystone commonwealth. 

Our own self-respect and independent manhood de- 
mands this. It is no less a duty to posterity than a debt 
of gratitude to our heroic ancestry. The educational 
effect will be stimulating and ennobling in all respects. 



96 COL. HENRY BOUQUET. 

For the sake of religious principle, our forefathers crossed 
old ocean's wave and braved the dangers of pioneer life 
in the new world. In the midst of untold perils, they 
were true to the principles of civil and religious liberty, 
as we have already seen, and here on our native hills was 
fought the decisive battle of Christian civilization against 
heathen barbarism. 



ADDENDA. 



Referring back to page 11, it is proper to remark that 
Bouquet and Washington were personally on good terms, 
and did not impugn each others motives. 

Many persons will doubtless feel prompted to contrib- 
ute toward the erection of a monument to Henry Bouquet, 
after reading the record of his gallant achievements. All 
such will please send funds or written pledges to James 
Gregg, Chairman of Finance Committee, Greensburg, Pa., 
subject to the disposal of the Executive Committee — 
Coulter, Kline and Gregg — for that purpose. 

P. S. — After this pamphlet was nearly all in type, I 
learned that at a meeting held subsequent to June 19, 
1883, it was decided to invite the following gentlemen to 
address the meeting at Bushy Run battlefield, Aug. 6, 
1883, viz: 

Hon. James G. Blaine, of Washington, D. C; Dr. Sam'l 
Wilson, of Allegheny City, Pa.; Gen. James A. Beaver, of 
Bellefonte, Pa.; Hon. William S. Stenger, of Harrisburg, 
Pa.; Rev. Cyrus Cort, of Creencastle, Pa.; Wm. M. Dar- 
lington, of Pittsburgh, Pa.; Hon. W. U. Hensel, of Lan- 
caster, Pa.; Hon. Silas M. Clark, of Indiana, Pa.; Hon. 
Wm. Koontz, of Somerset, Pa. 

Poem. — Frank Cowan, Esq., of Greensburg, Pa. 

Error. — On page 54, instead of " Schnorrbock " read 
" Schnorr, Vock." 



THE 



Bouquet Celebration 



Bushy Ron Battlefield, 



WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PA., 



AUaUST 6, 1883. 



Edited by REV. CYRUS COR T, of Greencastle, Fa., 
in Behalf of the Bouquet Memorial Cotnmiitee. 



LANCASTER, PA. 

Steinman & Hensel, Printers. 

1886. 



DEDICA TION. 



"J^O the Memory of Henry Bouquet and the lyb^ Army 
of Deliverance^ composed of Scotch Highlanders , Royal 
Americatis {mainly of German-Swiss extraction^, and Pro- 
vincial Rangers — nearly one-fourth of whom by their 
blood, and all of whom by their valor, consecrated the field 
of Bushy Run, August ^th and 6th, 1763. 

May the descendants of the hardy Scotch-Irish and 
German- Swiss Pioneer Settlers, whose goodly heritage they 
rescued from the savage destroyer, always show themselves 
worthy such heroic defenders. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Antecedent Steps, i 

Meeting in Greensburg Court House, 7 

The Gathering of the Clans, August 6, 1883, at Bushy Run, 9 

Organization of the Meeting, 10 

General Coulter's Remarks, •• 10 

Address of Rev. Cyrus C^rt, 12 

Poem of Dr. Frank Cowan, 19 

Pic-Nic Dinner in the Grove, a Contrast, Incidents, &c. ,.. 20 

Address of Gen. James A. Beaver, 23 

Address of Judge Parke, .' 29 

Address of Judge Bigham, 36 

Conclusion, ■^^^ 

Review of the Grand Army Posts, 39 

Letters from Public Officials, &c., 40 

Appendix : 

Important Addenda — Letters, &c., 43 

Celebration Items, 46 

Monument Collections, 47 

Guyasutha, 49 

Concluding Remarks, 50 




ANTECEDENT STEPS. 

THE celebration of the one hundred and twentieth anni- 
versary of the victory won by Colonel Henry Bouquet 
over the Eastern Confederates of Pontiac, at Bushy Run, Aug. 
6, 1763, brought together the largest and finest concourse 
of people ever assembled in Old Westmoreland county. 

The magnificence of the demonstration in honor of the 
gallant Bouquet and his Army of Deliverance, compensated 
in some degree for the long delay in commemorating their 
heroic achievements. 

The battle of Bushy Run, or Edge Hill, was not only 
memorable as an exhibition of dauntless courage and con- 
summate military skill under the most desperate circum- 
stances. It was so decisive and important in its immediate 
and remote results, that it well deserves perennial remem- 
brance. 

To perpetuate the memory of the great event itself, and 
its splendid commemoration, Aug. 6, 1883, a memorial 
committee was appointed with the unanimous approval of 
the vast assemblage convened in Gongaware's woods on cel- 
ebration day. After some delay, they herewith present the 
result of their labors. 

Every movement of this kind has its history, in the light 
of which it can only be properly understood and appre- 
ciated. 

Accordingly it has been deemed advisable to give a brief 
sketch of the various steps that led the way to the celebra- 
tion of Aug. 6, 1883, as a proper introduction to the full 
account of the celebration itself. 



1 The Bouquet Celebration. 

The Renaissance, or renewal of interest in Bouquet and 
his campaigns on the part of those more immediately identi- 
^fied with the recent celebration, dates back to the autumn 
of 1872. 

On the 25th of September, of that year. Dr. Frank 
Cowan published an article in his newspaper, giving an ac- 
count of a visit to the battle-field of Edge Hill, or Bushy 
Run, and a sketch of the battle itself, as given in the old 
provincial work of Dr. William Smith. The young editor 
lamented the dearth or total absence of local traditions re- 
specting the battle as compared with the Burning of Han- 
nastown. He accounted for this on the ground that the 
battle was fought by foreigners, none of whose decendants 
had ever located near the scene of the conflict, &c. At the 
end of nearly two months, a mutilated copy of Mr. Cowan's 
paper, with the aforsaid article, fell into the hands of Rev. 
Cyrus Cort, then residing at Vinton, Iowa. Mr. Cort im- 
mediately wrote a lengthy article, giving an account of the 
battle of Bouquet and a number of incidents and traditions 
connected with it, which he had received from his great 
grandfather, Jacob Byerly, and his son Joseph on Christ- 
mas day, 1855, several years before the Revolutionary vet- 
eran ended his days in his ninety-ninth year. Jacob Byerly 
was a son of Andrew Byerly, the founder of Byerly Station 
at Bushy Run, and along with the rest of the Byerly family, 
barely escaped with his life to Fort Ligonier, in the latter 
part of May, 1763. After being closely besieged for two 
months. Col. Bouquet came to their relief with his Scotch 
Highlanders, Royal Americans, and a few Provincial Ran- 
gers. Andrew Byerly went along with the army, and was 
in the advance when the battle of Aug. 6, 1763, began on 
Gongaware's hill. He took an active part in the two days' 
conflict, and through him some very interesting incidents 
have been handed down to posterity which were never pub- 
lished until recent years. The article of Rev. Cort, besides 
supplementing the editorial of Mr. Cowan as regards inci- 
dents of the battle, urged upon the people of Westmoreland 
the duty of erecting a durable monument to the memory of 
Bouquet and his Army of Deliverance. 

The editor heartily commended the article to the atten- 



Antecedent Steps. 3 

tion of his readers, and called upon all who were interested 
in the history of Old Westmoreland, the mother county, to 
record without delay all traditional incidents and adven- 
tures with which they might be acquainted. Thus the mat- 
ter rested until December, 1880, when Rev. C. Cort pub- 
lished an article on Bouquet and his campaigns in the 
Guardian, a monthly magazine printed at Philadelphia. A 
revised edition of this article, with a poem on '* Bouquet's 
Grave," was issued a few weeks later in pamphlet form. 
'Y\i^ Guardian article was republished in a short time by 
many of the papers in Southern and Southwestern Penn- 
sylvania, and created a good deal of interest in the hero of 
Bushy Run. A short time previous, George Harrison 
Fisher, Esq., of Philadelphia, had published in the Penn- 
sylvania Historical Magazine some interesting correspon- 
dence between Col. Bouquet and a Miss Willing, together 
with a sketch of the gallant Swiss officer. This was embel- 
lished with a fine steel engraving of Col. Bouquet, taken 
from an original painting in possession of the Fisher family. 

Rev. Cort was not aware of the article of Mr. Fisher 
until after the publication of his own. 

Again there was a pause until the centennial observances 
of the burning of Hannastown, July 13, 1882. As one of 
the speakers on that occasion. Rev. Cort in the course of 
his address made the following reference to Bouquet and 
Bushy Run : *'This is an age of centennials, and I am glad 
that the centennial boom has struck Old Westmoreland. It 
should have struck you nineteen years sooner. It has al- 
ways appeared passing strange to me that Westmoreland 
county, and Western Pennsylvania failed to celebrate with 
centennial memorial services the victory of Bouquet in the 
heart of our noble old county on Aug. 6, 1763. It is true 
that many of us were off to the wars in 1863, and had more 
important work in fighting battles for the preservation of 
the Union than to commemorate the deeds of colonial 
days. But there were enough men and women at home to 
have made the welkin ring with the grateful notes of centen- 
nial commemoration. An event so critical, so decisive and 
far reaching in its results, should be commemorated by an- 
nual as well as centennials observances. The heroic deeds 

■^\'*^\ ^ 



4 The Bouquet Celebration. 

of Col. Bouquet, the gallant German-Swiss commander, the 
Scotch Highlanders and Colonial Volunteers, that formed 
the little army of deliverance, deserve to be held in grateful 
and everlasting remembrance by all the descendants of the 
thousands of pioneer settlers in Western Pennsylvania and 
Virginia, who were then delivered from the horrors of sav- 
age warfare. Had such deeds of valor, and such inspiring 
associations been connected with any spot in New England, 
the Yankees would have made it pay long ago in more ways 
than one. Bouquet's battle-field, near Bushy Run, a few 
miles west of here, should be hallowed as historic ground, 
and honored by the erection of a monument that would 
vividly call to remembrance the deeds of the dauntless 
heroes who consecrated it with their blood and valor one 
hundred and nineteen years ago." 

In the latter part of October, the battle of Bushy Run 
was brought prominently before the public in the bi-centen- 
nial celebration at Philadelphia. Rev. Cyrus Cort, who 
was in the city at the time, wrote an article on his return 
home, which was published in all the Greensburg papers. 
We give the following extracts as bearing directly on the 
subject in hand, and because the article helped greatly in 
preparing the way for the celebration which came off, as 
suggested, on the succeeding anniversary of the victory of 
Bouquet : 

The battle of Col. Bouquet with the Indians at Bushy Run in 1763, 
formed a prominent feature in the gorgeous tableau that paraded the 
streets of Philadelphia on Wednesday night, October 25th, during the 
great Bi- Centennial celebration. Comparatively few of the spectators 
were well enough posted in the colonial history of the Keystone Com- 
monwealth to understand or appreciate the representation which held 
so conspicuous a position in the grand pageant Even so well informed 
and cautious a paper as the Ledger, spoke of it next day as a fight be- 
ween the British soldiers and the early settlers ! It seems that Major 
Beane received the suggestion from Mr. Stone, the Librarian of the 
Pennsylvania Historical society, who considers the victory of Bouquet 
over the Indians at Bushy Run, the decisive or turning point in the con- 
quest of the vast region west of the Alleghenies by the Anglo-Saxon 
race. The representation was rather too much of an anacronism. 
British soldiers and Indians were armed with the latest improved 
modem rifles. The very essential Scotch Highlander and Colonial 
Volunteer, features of the conflict, were ignored in the tableau for lack 



Antecedent Steps. 5 

of proper costume for the characters, as the writer was informed by 
Major Beane. But certainly the Scotch societies, or the Caledonian 
club, that took part in Tuesday's parade, could easily have furnished 
this, and thus have made the representation much more correct as well 
as picturesque. 

The point, however, to which I wish to call the attention of West- 
moreland this time, does not concern the success of the tableau represen- 
tation of the battle of Bouquet so much as the importance of the event 
itself, and the rich historical treasures that necessarily cluster around the 
locality where that desperate and decisive conflict took place. Allow 
me in this connection to repeat a few sentences of my Hannastown 
Centennial address, delivered on the 13th day of last July : 

[Here follow extracts already quoted from the Hannas- 
town address which need not be repeated.] 

The sentiments then expressed have been strikingly confirmed by the 
estimate of the learned Librarian of the Pennsylvania Historical Society, 
and by the unusual prominence given to the battle of Bouquet in the re- 
cent Bi- Centennial tableaux in Philadelphia. 

In my monograph on Col. Bouquet, several years ago, I set forth the 
same views. It seems to me that it is high time that Westmorelanders, 
and the descendants of the Colonial settlers, should make an earnest 
practical effort to mark the battle-field of Bouquet, a short distance east 
of Harrison City, on the old Gongaware and Wannamaker farms. With 
the map of Hutchins, the royal geographer, executed soon after the bat- 
tle, and published with Dr. William Smith's account of Bouquet's ex- 
pedition, and with the aid of local traditions, this could be done with- 
out much difficulty. The little spring from which my great-great- 
grandfather Byerly carried a scant supply of water in his hat to the 
wounded Highlanders and volunteers, who were almost perishing with 
thirst during the two days conflict, would help to locate an important 
part of the field. 

* * * -x- * -x- * 

Old residents can easily designate the fields where the old forest trees 
contained so many bullets, when their land was cleared a generation or 
so ago. The exact route of the old road between Fort Ligonier and 
Fort Pitt could no doubt be definitely fixed at this point, so as to help 
determine the exact locality of the battle. The committee having 
charge of the Soldiers' Monument enterprise, of which, I believe, Gen. R. 
Coulter, Hon. Jas. C. Clarke, Gen. Thos. Gallagher and John Arm- 
strong, Esq., are members, could not only locate the outlines of Bou- 
quet's battle-field, but would be .a very good committe to receive funds 
and devise a suitable monument in honor of Col. Henry Bouquet and 
his gallant army of deliverance. 

* ^ ♦ * ^t * * 

The proposed soldiers' monument to Westmoreland military heroes 
might be so designed as to commemorate Colonial heroes like Bouquet, 



6 The Bouquet Celebration. 

Revolutionary heroes like St. Clair, War of 1 812 heroes like Markle, or 
Major Andrew Byerly, (whose command defended Commodore Per- 
ry's fleet while it was being built on Hake Erie), Mexican war heroes, 
&c., as well aslhe heroes of the latest and greatest of our American 
wars. 

■X- * ** ¥: * • 

At all events, I trust that suitable efforts will be made at an early day, 
to define the main features or outlines of Bouquet's battle-field. Vice 
President Jourdan, of the Historical Society at Philadelphia, called my 
attention to the fact that Bancroft or some other standard author, stated 
that the scene of Bouquet's battle was unknown. I remarked that the 
statement was not correct, and that the battle was fought in the heart of 
Westmoreland county, a short distance east of Harrison City. Bullets, 
bones, &c., had in former days, been found there in great numbers, and 
the local tradition, together with the map of Hutchins, would enable any 
intelligent person to locate the battlefield. I am confident that the 
Pennsylvania Historical Society would cheerfully give room in their val- 
uable magazine for any communication on the subject which such a 
committee as I have designated might choose to make. In this way 
justice might, in a measure, be done to the memory of the departed 
heroes, while at the same time a pilgrim shrine would be erected in the 
grand old county of our nativity, that would increase in interest and 
importance as age after age rolled by. Might not the next 4th of July, 
or the 5th or 6th days of August be made memorable by a celebration, 
sham battles, speeches, &c., that would give the movement a successful 
impulse ? Judging from the interest he manifested in the monograph 
on Col. Henry Bouquet, several years ago, and more recently in one on 
" Baron Steuben and his relations to the Reformed Church," I believe 
Adjutant General R. C. Drum would honor and grace such an occasion 
with his presence if invited by such a committee. 

So also, public spirited Westmorelanders from all parts of the county, 
and from all parts of the Union, many of whom have become distin- 
guished in civil and military life, would esteem it a privilege and 
pleasure to take part in such a demonstration. Let us begin at the be- 
ginning in this matter of commemorating the deeds of departed heroes 
and benefactors whose names are linked inseparably with the history of 
old Westmoreland. Thus can we best secure proper remembrance 
and honor in the end for the scarred veterans and heroic dead of our 
late war, and at the same time stimulate intelligent interest and gen- 
erous emulation in the minds and hearts of the rising generation. The 
fame of their illustrious men is one of the noblest heritages of a people. 
Those who will not gratefully cherish the names and deeds of heroic an- 
cestors and benefactors, will scarcely do aught that posterity will delight 
to honor. For the sake of the living champions of constitutional liberty 
and union, and for the sake of unborn generations, no less than for the 
sake of the illustrious dead of Colonial days, I trust that Westmore- 
landers will do speedy and ample justice to the memory of Colonel 
Henry Bouquet, and the 1763 army of deliverance. 

Greencastle, Franklin Co., Pa,, Oct. 30. Cyrus Cort. 



Meeting in the Greensburg Court House. 7 

The county papers generally favored the proposed celebra- 
tion and articles furnished by Rev. C. Cort and Hon. Jos. H. 
Kuhns in furtherance of the movement were, from time to 
time, published in the Greensburg Daily Press, and in sev- 
eral of the weeklies. 

April 25, 1883, a committee consisting of Rev. C. Cort, 
S. A. Kline, Esq., Maj. J. M. Laird, A. B. Kline, Esq. and 
Curtis Gregg, visited and located the Bushy Run, or Edge 
Hill battle-field in its main features, and selected a grove 
covering the same for the proposed celebration. 

MEETING IN THE GREENSBURG COURT HOUSE. 

On the following evening a public meeting was held in 
the Court House at Greensburg, to arrange for the celebra- 
tion. Ex-Governor Latta presided, and General Coulter 
and Hon Jacob Turney acted as vice presidents, with Maj. 
Laird, Frank Vogle and Curtis Gregg as secretaries. 

In an address of over half an hour. Rev. C. Cort reviewed 
the career of Col. Bouquet, and described the battle of 
Bushy Run and its far reaching results. He urged the pro- 
priety of getting up a celebration at the next anniversary of 
Bouquet's victory on that bloody field. Bouquet as the 
champion and chief builder of the Forbes road, from Bed- 
ford to Fort Pitt, in 1758, had rendered signal service to the 
province of Pennsylvania. 

A committee consisting of Revs. Love, Moorhead and 
Lucien Cort, and Philip Kuhns, Dr. Kline and A. M. 
Sloan, Esq., presented a series of resolutions providing for 
the celebration by religious services of a commemorative 
nature, in all the churches of the county, Aug. 5, and by 
addresses, poem, military display and pic-nic dinner in the 
grove on Bushy Run battle-field, Aug. 6, 1883. 

Committees were appointed as follows : 

Committee of Arrangements to secure and prepare grounds for the 
celebration : Amos B. Kline, J. B. Laux, Lewis Wannamaker, E. F. 
Houseman, Lewis Gongaware, William Moore, Mr. Shadwick, Jos. 
Clark, Robert Byerly, Wm. G. Shuster, Abner Cort. 

Committee on Finance : Jas. Gregg, Esq., Geo. F. Huff, Capt. J. J. 
Wirsing, Dr. Sowash, Wm. B. Skelly, Paul Lauffer, David Snyder, 
Jno. Rankin, Sebastian Baer, Esq., Hon. N. M. Marker, H. F. Lud- 
wig, Esq., Hon. John Hugus, and George Plumer Smith, of Philadel- 
phia, 



8 The Bouquet Celebration. 

Committee on Invitation : General R. Coulter, Hon. Jos. H. Kuhns, 
Hon. Jacob Turney, Hon. John Latta, Maj. James M. Laird, G. D. Al- 
bert, Esq., John A. Marchand, Esq., Dr. Frank Cowan. 

Committee of Reception at Bushy Run on Monday — viz : Hon. John 
Latta, Hon. James R. McAfee, Col. Geo. F. Huff, John Kuhns and A. 
D. McConnell, Esqs. 

The chairmen, R. Coulter, Jas. Gregg and Amos B. 
Kline, were appointed an executive committee to fill all 
vacancies and have a general oversight of the celebration. 

A few weeks previous to the celebration. Rev. C. Cort 
published, by request of the executive committee, a pam- 
phlet of one hundred pages on ''Col. Henry Bouquet and 
His Campaigns." This document was received with words 
of hearty commendation by the religious, as well as secu- 
lar press, German and English, in Pennslvania, Ohio and 
New York. Lengthy extracts from it were inserted in the 
Pittsburg dailies a few days before the celebration took 
place. In this way the name of Bouquet and Bushy Run 
became familiar to thousands who had never heard of 
them before, and a deep interest was created in the ap- 
proaching celebration. Thus, too, the questions of some of 
the Pittsburg dailies two months previous, ''Who is Bou- 
quet, What Did He Do," &c., were measurably answered 
in a way that raised the subject far above the plane of 
ridicule. 

Amos B. Kline, with his colleagues on the committee of 
arrangements, did their work well. With the assistance of 
County Surveyor Wm. Miller, John Kuhns, Esq., Ed. Potts, 
Louis Wannamaker and Rev. C. Cort, the battle-field was 
definitely located and the exact positions of Bouquet's 
troops and their savage assailants, clearly indicated. The 
first and second positions of the troops ; the lines held re- 
spectively by the Highlanders, the Royal Americans and 
Provincial Rangers ; the location of the pack horses, the 
cattle and the Flour Bag Fort, occupied by the wounded, 
in the two days' fight were definitely marked with flags 
and handboards, and pointed out as they had not hitherto 
been for a hundred years. 



The Gathering of the Clans. g 

THE GATHERING OF THE CLANS — AUGUST 6, 1 883. 

All the necessary preliminary arrangements having been 
completed, the friends and promoters of the celebration 
awaited the dawning of the memorable 6th of August, 1883, 
with anxious hearts. It came bright and beautiful, as balmy 
and propitious a day as could have been desired for such an 
occasion. And never did the sons and daughters of Old 
Westmoreland turn out in such a vast and magnificent array 
as they did on that memorable day. Old and public-spirited 
citizens like Gen. Thos. F. Gallagher, who had attended all 
important convocations of our people for a generation past, 
declared that the concourse assembled on Bouquet's battle- 
field, Aug. 6, was by far the largest and grandest of them 
all. It was the largest assemblage of any kind ever con- 
vened in Old Westmoreland, and by far the largest of the 
kind ever convened in Western Pennsylvania. Estimates of 
the numbers present vary greatly, ranging from 8,000 to 25,- 
000. Dr. Samuel Stewart, who had considerable army ex- 
perience, named the latter number. It was estimated that 
between 2,500 and 3,000 vehicles were on the grounds or 
in the groves, fields, fence corners, &c., within a circuit of 
two miles. A large number of hacks ran during most of the 
day from Manor and Penn Stations, and thousands footed it 
from the railroad and neighboring towns. At Irwin, busi- 
ness was largely suspended, and L. Kunkle, with four Per- 
cheron horses, hauled on a large wagon, seventy-two per- 
sons to the battle-field. All other vehicles had been engaged 
weeks ahead. 

''What would Colonel Bouquet have thought of this," 
exclaimed Ex-United States Senator Cowan to General Bea- 
ver, as they met at the outskirts of the crowd, on the Gen- 
eral's arrival. It was indeed a mighty host to honor the 
memory of Bouquet and his Army of Deliverance, on the 
very scene of their heroic achievements, after the lapse of 
120 years. If the ovation was long in coming, it made up 
in a measure for the delay by its splendid character and 
magnificent proportions. It was worthy the man and the 
occasion, and did high honor to Old Westmoreland, the 
mother of counties, and the mother of the great majority of 



lo The Bouquet Celebration. 

those assembled on the historic field, in social and patriotic 
communion. 

THE ORGANIZATION OF THE MEETING. 

A large stand had been erected in Gongaware's woods 
by the committee of arrangements, on part of the old 
Bushy Run battle-field. The stand was tastefully decorated 
with American flags and with several flags of the Swiss Re- 
public, loaned for the occasion by the Swiss consul at Phil- 
adelphia. The coat-of-arms of the Cantons of Berne and of 
Vand, the home of Bouquet, painted on large metallic 
shields, with their brown bears and motto, " Liberte et 
Patrie," held a conspicuous place. Relics in large numbers 
from Provincial and Revolutionary times, covered the tables. 
Prominent among them was a bayonet, found in a clearing 
on the battle-field, in good state of preservation, two years 
ago. Amos B. Khne, Esq., chairman of the committee 
of arrangements, called the meeting to order at half past ten 
o'clock, and nominated General Richard Coulter as presid- 
ing officer. The General made a short speech as follows : 

GENERAL COULTER'S REMARKS. 

Gentlemen and Ladies : You all know the object of 
this meeting. We are here to commemorate the memory of 
a brave and skillful commander, and a military achievement 
that had far greater influence in determining the character 
of the Western end of the State, than any event of later 
years. In the stirring times of later wars, the battle of 
Bushy Run had been forgotten. Its importance had not 
been appreciated, and it received but a small share of the 
attention which it deserves. But I am not going to make 
any speech. It is my duty to see the programme carried 
out. 

Prayer was then offered by Rev. B. F. Boyle, of Irwin. 

On motion of Dr. Frank Cowan, a committee consisting 
of Geo. D. Albert, Esq., Rev. Cyrus Cort and E. B. Kenly, 
was appointed to prepare a memorial of the celebration. 

The following is the list of vice presidents and secretaries : 

Vice Presidents : Hon. Jos. H. Kuhns, Hon, Jas. C. Clarke, Greens- 
burg; Robert M. Cavelt, Irwin; Samuel Rock, Esq., Adamsburg ; 



Organization of the Meeting. ii 

Daniel Kuhns, Jno. C. Rankin, Jacob Gongaware, Jesse Brinker, Penn 
township ; Jacob Rugh, J. J. Hazlett, Esq., Hempfield township ; Dr. 
Jas. Fulton, Salem borough ; H. M. Jones, Salem township ; Dr. Rugh, 
Finton Torrence, Franklin township ; Obediah McKeown, Washington 
township; John Townsend, AUegheay township; Isaac Irwin, Burrell 
township ; Jonathan Whitesell, Bell township ; Robert Fostor, Loyal- 
hanna township; General Thos. Gallagher, John M. Stewart, New* Alex- 
andria; David Brown, Samuel Gorgas, Deny township; Col. John Oursler 
Col. Geo. Anderson, Latrobe borough ; Col. John Johnston, James 
Rogers, Unity township ; John Fausold, Mt. Pleasant township ; Capt. 
Wm. Jordan, O. P. Shupe, Mt. Pleasant borough ; Jacob Stoner, Hunt- 
ingdon, East, township ; Samuel Bell, Dr. Sutton, Huntingdon, South, 
township; Dr. Patton, Hon. E. C. Leightty, West Newton; Maj. M. 
M. Dick, Geo. Waltz, Sewickley township; Geo. Campbell, Cook 
township; John Hubbs, Samuel McLain, Donegal township; Howard 
Covode, Hon. John Hargnett, Ligonier borough ; Col. David Hoover, 
Frank Ford, St. Clair township ; Hon Daniel Kaine, Fayette county ; 
Dr. J. M, Service, Dr. Kerr, Philadelphia ; Robert Paul, Rev. T. R. 
Ewing, Indiana county ; I. W. Hughes, Bedford county; Hon. Thos. 
J. Bigham, Francis Torrence, J. P. Fleming, Hon. J. E. Parke, Alle- 
gheny county; Robt. L. Johnson, Esq., Hon. D. J. Morrell, Cambria 
county ; Hon. Ed. S. Golden, John W. Tohner, Armstrong county ; 
Simon Hughes, Esq., Edward Scull, Somerset county; John T. Shryock 
Zanesville, Ohio, » 

Secretaries: Frank Vogle, Greensburg Democrat; Jas. B. Laux, 
Greensburg Press ; E. V. B. Laird, Greensburg Argus ; D. S. Atkin- 
son, Esq., Greensburg Tribune and Herald ; Thos. J. Keenan, Chas. 
Shryock, Pittsburg Titnes ; Geo. H. Welshonse, E. C. McCurdy, Pitts- 
burg Dispatch ; J. G. Blair, Daniel Robinson, Pittsburg Chronicle ; 
Robt. W. Herbert, Pittsburg Post ; L. M. Ackley, Pittsburg Commer- 
cial- Gazette ; I. M. Newcomer, Scottdale Tribune ; Chas. Fink, La- 
trobe Advance; E. C. Hough, West Newton Press ; Jas. B. Sanson, 
Indiana Democrat. 

At this time the scene was a very animated one. An im- 
mense assemblage stood in front of the grand-stand, eight 
brass bands, from Greenburg, Latrobe, Ligonier, and other 
localities made the welkin ring with their martial and patri- 
otic strains. It was with difficulty that General Coulter 
succeeded in silencing some of them, so as to enable him to 
proceed with the programme. 

He then introduced Rev. C. Cort, of Greencastle, Pa., 
who made the opening address, as follows : 



12 The Bouquet Celebration. 

ADDRESS OF REV. CYRUS CORT. 

Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends and Countrymen : We 
have longed to see this day, and we now see it and are glad. 
We have met in the leafy grove, under heaven's blue arch, 
in this temple not made with hands, to honor the memory of 
Colonel Henry Bouquet and the 1 763 Army of Deliverance. 
The skies are bright and the heavens smile upon us. It is 
right and proper that we should leave our shops and our 
stores, our mines and our farms, to mingle thus in social and 
patriotic communion. It is high time, indeed, that this 
should be done. Greensburg should have been called after 
Bouquet. Many of your sons should have been namesakes 
of the gallant Swiss hero, to whom we all owe so much. In- 
stead of this many living in sight of this historic field of 
his triumph, were ignorant of the first A B C of his history. 
Even the little village called after him, a couple of miles up 
the Manor, some of you used to spell with one ''u," and 
two t's, and two e's, (Boquette) instead of Bouquet ^ as the 
grand warrior wrote it. 

But all this dense ignorance has passed away, and even 
some of the Pittsburg newspaper men, who inquired a few 
months ago, ''Who is Bouquet?" are beginning to get some 
light into their darkened understandings. Let the good 
work go on. Every gallant young man ought to have a but- 
ton-hole forget-me-not bouquet on his coat to-day, and 
every young lady ought to have the beau without the quet — 
only let them take care that they have not too many strings 
to their bow, or too many beaux to their string. One is 
enough, if he is good, and too many if bad. 

But all jokes aside. 

I am heartily glad to see you here to-day. This is indeed 
a grand assemblage of the beauty and chivalry. Fair women 
and brave men of Old Westmoreland, and honored citizens 
of the Republic from abroad, distinguished in the forum and 
the field, are here to grace and honor the occasion with their 
presence — men who have poured out their blood like water 
on the battle-fields of the Republic. 

As a grateful and progressive people, we dare never for- 
get the toils, the dangers and hardships of our pioneer an- 



Address of Rev. Cyrus Corf. 13 

cestors. The wilderness has been turned into a fruitful field 
and the desert made to blossom like the rose, but it was by 
the sweat and blood of brave and hardy men ; the fruits ot 
whose labor we now enjoy. 

This is hallowed ground, and sacred are the memories 
that cluster around this spot. One hundred and twenty 
years ago, this very forenoon, the representative champions 
of Christian civilization and human progress made the 
gallant charge around and through this grove that rolled 
back the exulting hosts of barbarism. Here was executed 
that masterly stratagem that shattered the right flank and 
front of the encompassing host of savages. Here was broken 
the eastern wing of Pontiac's great conspiracy. Here it was 
that Bouquet plucked the flower of safety and success from 
the nettle of danger. Here, from the very jaws of defeat, 
disaster and death, he snatched a glorious victory. Here 
the die was cast and the stakes were lost, and lost forever, 
by the impetuous confederates of Pontiac. Here was fought 
and won the battle that decided Anglo-Saxon supremacy in 
the Valley of the Mississippi. Here the kilted and 
plaited Highlander, from Caledonia's hills, the red-coated 
Royal Americans (mostly of German and Swiss extraction), 
and their comrades, the Provincial Ranger, from East Penn- 
sylvania and .Maryland, all fought side by side, and 
triumphed under the masterful leadership of that superb of- 
ficer who hailed from the Alpine Mountains of Republican 
Switzerland. This is indeed hallowed ground on which we 
stand to-day. 

"A shrine to code nor creed confined, 

A Delphian vale, a Palestine ; 

A Mecca of the mind." 

All true-hearted men and women will delight to honor the 
memory of the gallant heroes who fought and fell on this 
bloody field. But we, who are the beneficiaries of their 
self-sacrificing toil and valor, we, in whose veins flows the 
blood of Scotch-Irish and German-Swiss ancestors ; above 
all, we, whose pioneer ancestors were rescued from the 
tomahawk and scalping-knife of the blood-thirsty savages, 
we, my countrymen, one and all, may well unite in paying 
homage to the memory of the brave men who consecrated 



14 The Bouquet Celebration. 

these hills and these vales with their blood and their daunt- 
less courage 120 years ago. 

" The land is holy where they fought, 
And holy where they fell." 

The lofty example of heroism, the steadfast devotion to 
duty even unto death, the magnanimous response to the cries 
of panic-stricken settlers and of beleaguered frontier garri- 
sons in deadly peril, the virtues that exalt and adorn human 
nature, which were illustrated on this gory field in trying 
days of yore, dare not be forgotten — all this is full of in- 
struction and inspiration. 

^'^ There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the 
Almighty giveth him understanding." 

/' Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word 
that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." 

The Almighty gives us words of direct revelation as we 
have them recorded in the Sacred Scriptures, and words of 
Providential manifestation in the unfoldings of history; 
words of solemn import and energizing power for all who 
have ears to hear and eyes to see. Ideas and sentiments, 
such as come from ennobling historical associations and 
surroundings, are more to be prized than silver or gold. 
They enter into the warp and woof and become part of the 
texture of communities and nations. 

And here to-day, my countrymen, we gather for ourselves 
and our children some of the rich, historic treasures of the 
past, and we catch an inspiration in contemplating the 
worthy deeds of departed heroes and benefactors of the 
human race. Life is flat and stale and monotonous, indeed, 
when it lacks sentiment and enthusiasm — I mean enthusiasm 
in the true sense — the stirrings of Deity within us, prompt- 
ing us to realize high ideas of manhood and womanhood in 
whatever sphere Providence may call us to occupy. 

"Without enthusiasm nothing truly great was ever 
achieved," says Senecca, the greatest of heathen moralists. 
It gives rapture to the poet, heroism to the warrior, devo- 
tion to the martyr, ardor to the patriot, lifting them above 
their narrow selfishness into the plane of superhuman effort 
and consecration. 

The will, the intellect, yea our entire ieing in body and 



Address of Rev. Cyrus Cort. 15 

soul must be enthused with grand ideas of truth and duty 
if we shall ever effectually help forward the race in its 
ceaseless efforts to reach the final goal of history and 
humanity. 

A stagnant and treadmill existence, indeed, is that of the 
Mongolian and other Orientals who are largely destitute of 
sentiment and enthusiasm. 

But we, who represent a cosmopolitan population ; we 
who belong to the great Republic of the New World, which 
embraces in one vast national existence all the historic tribes 
of humanity, the kindred streams of the great Teutonic or 
Indo-Germanic family of nations, we must gather and 
cherish the achievements of by-gone ages and especially 
those that so deeply concern our own life and history. 

Only by learning aright the lessons of the past can we go 
forward with safety and courage in the future. Rooted and 
grounded in principles and sentiments that have stood the 
test of the ages we may take hostages of futurity and march 
in the vanguard of human progress. Then, as Tennyson 
has expressed it : 

" Not in vain the distance beacons forward, forward, let us range ; 
Let the great world spin forever, down the ringing grooves of change ; 
Through the shadows of the globe we sweep into the younger day ; 
Better fifty years of Europe Than a cycle of Cathay * * * 
Oh, I see the crescent promise of my spirit hath not set; 
Ancient founts of inspiration well through all my fancy yet." 

Yes, one year of American life full of vigorous thought 
and progress is better than a thousand years of monotonous 
treadmill Oriental existence. 

Civilization, and especially Christian civilization, makes 
history possible. The red men roamed through these forests 
for countless ages, but their lives and their labors were like 
water spilt upon the ground which can never be gathered up 
for the benefit of others. No reliable records have they to 
show the pit from which they were dug and the rock from 
which they were hewn — hence fundamental elements of 
progress and improvement are lacking. 

Great men lived before Agamemnon but they had no 
Homer to sing their praises and immortalize their deeds, 
and so far as instruction and inspiration to others are con- 
cerned they lived and toiled and struggled in vain. 



1 6 The Bouquet Celebration. 

In order to be true to ourselves and those who shall come 
after us, we must cherish and record the deeds of those who 
have gone before us as the master spirits of our race. 
Among these the pioneers who took their lives in their 
hands to carve out homes for themselves and their children, 
dare not be forgotten. 

The muse of poetry and the muse of history must be in- 
voked, as we have invoked them here to-day, in behalf of 
one of 

" The few, the immortal names 
That were not born to die." 

The contemplation of noble characters and great achieve- 
ments is in itself ennobling. It lifts us out of the narrow 
rut of our own selfishness into a higher and purer atmos- 
phere. 

Anniversary commemorations, orations, poems, historical 
records, monuments such as I hope to see crown these hills 
in honor of Bouquet, these enshrine, crystalize, and local- 
ize, great and decisive events. 

They are educational and stimulating to the young in the 
highest degree. As the soul of Thucyides was enthused 
with the lofty resolve to emulate the works of Herodotus when 
he heard them read for the first time at the Olympic games, 
so amid such scenes as these the young and gifted sons of 
genius feel within them the kindlings of high and honor- 
able effort. 

" Immortal fame is a grand thought, 

It is worthy the toil of the noble hearted." 

** Fame is a spur to brave a;id honest deeds 

And who despises fame will soon renounce the virtues that deserve it." 

But fame must have an enduring basis of genuine worth 
and merit ; fraud and falsehood vitiate everything that they 
touch. Not only the makers, but the lovers of lies, shall 
be excluded from the company of the blessed in the New 
Jerusalem above. We must love and seek truth as the jewel 
of the soul, as the pearl beyond all price, as that which 
allies us to the great and omnipotent Jehovah. Justice and 
judgment ^re the habitation of His throne, the place where 
His Honor dwelleth. 

The poorest widow, with a just cause, is stronger before 



Address of Rev. Cyrus Corf. 17 

the final tribunal of history and of God than the mightiest 
monarch that ever sat upon an earthly throne. ''The 
hypocrite's hope shall perish." " The refuge of lies shall 
be swept away." There is a Nemesis of History which 
sooner or later avenges the wrongs of the past and vindi- 
cates with just judgment the inexorable claims of truth and 
righteousness. 

The locomotive may take the place of the pack horse, the 
four horse reaper and steam separator may take the place of 
the sickle and the flail of our forefathers, the telegraph may 
take_the place of the express rider, and ten thousand 
other improvements be made in art and science and material 
industries, but the old-fashioned principles of morality and 
religion are unchangeable, and eternal ''Jesus Christ is the 
same, yesterday, to-day and forever." " The holiest among 
the mighty, and the mightiest among the holy, who with 
His pierced hands has lifted empires off their hinges, turned 
the streams of centuries, and still governs the ages. ' ' 

As Julia Ward Howe has expressed it in the Grand Battle 
Hymn of the Republic : 

Let the Hero born of woman, crush the serpent with his heel, 
He has sounded forth the trumpet that shall never call retreat, 
He is sifting out the hearts of men before His judgment seat ; 
O, be swift, my soul, to answer Him; be jubilant my feet. 
In the beauty of the lilies, Christ was born across the sea. 
With a glory in his bosom that transfigures you and me, 
As he died to make men holy, 
Let us die to make men free, 
While God is marching on. 

Yes, make men free ! free in the highest and noblest 
sense of that word. 
" He alone is free whom the truth makes free, and all are slaves beside." 

For the sake of religious principle, our forefathers came 
to this new world, and we are degenerate sons of noble 
sires if we barter away the precious birthright. Let us be 
true to the God of our fathers, and He will never for- 
sake us. 

Men and women of Westmoreland, and all good people 
here assembled, this is a great day, a "red letter day" in 
the history of our grand old county. 



1 8 The Bouquet Celebration. 

Here, on this ground, hallowed by the blood and strug- 
gles of the Swiss and the Scot, on this historic field of Edge 
Hill and Bushy Run, let us dedicate our lives anew to the 
sacred cause of Christian civilization and constitutional lib- 
erty. 

Bouquet was a free-born Switzer. In the land of Tell and 
Winkleried he breathed the air of freedom. In the armies 
of the Dutch Republic, the pioneer of our own great Repub- 
lic, he gained his first laurels and won distinction. His 
sword was always drawn in behalf of the land that best repre- 
sented the cause of civil and religious liberty. 

He sincerely loved the British Constitution, the princi- 
ples of Magna Charta, dear to every Anglo-Saxon heart. 
He indignantly resigned his high position in the King!s ser- 
vice, when he thought it involved some degree of humilia- 
tion, which he, as a high-souled man, could never brook. 

For what he was in himself, for what the poor Swiss boy 
from the shadow of the Alps made of himself as the peer of 
the greatest and best among the foremost nations on the face 
of the earth ; for what he did for us and our pioneer an- 
cestors, we commend his example, we honor his memory 
and invoke for him an undying fame. 

" Cold in the dust the cherished form may lie," 

As it has lain for lo ! these j 1 8 years, in an unknown 
grave in the sunny South. 

'* But that which made this man and men like him, can never die." 

With Pericles and Edward Everett, we may say of illus- 
trious men, " the whole earth is their sepulchre, and all 
time the millennium of their glory." 

Oh, land of the brave and free ! 

Bright as the noonday sun. 
Long as your streams shall run, 

Let the fame of the Switzer be. 



The papers state that Rev. C. Cort spoke in a loud, clear 
voice, and was frequently applauded. 

General Coulter then introduced the poet of the day, who 
delivered his production in good style, as follows : 



Poem of Dr. Frank Cowan. 19 

THE POEM OF DR. FRANK COWAN. 
THE BATTLE OF BUSHY RUN. 

What ! Poet, wouldst thou sing of war ? — of human strife and slaughter? 
Of severed limbs and shattered bones? — of heart's-blood shed like 

water ? — 
Of Murder in its maddest mood, agasp with fiery breath. 
Leaving the world without a sun, a blackened waste in death ? 

Aye, wouldst thou, in this Christian land, extol the God of War ? — 
Or Scythian Sword, the Roman Mars, the Scandinavian Thor, 
Or Mexic monster, Hindoo ghoul — whatever it may prove, 
Forefend against it, Jesus Christ, thou God of Peace and Love ! 

Yea, Man of Peace, I sing of war ! — of butchery and blood ! — 
Heads hot with rage, hearts hard with hate, and hands with gore im- 
brued ! — 
Destruction crushing into dust the noblest forms of earth 
Th' Eternal and the Infinite unite in giving birth ! 

Yea, war ! red-handed, raging war ! in its most direful form ; 

The struggle for existence in a fierce organic storm ! 

The lightning's flash, the dart of death, the sword, the barb, the ball ! 

The thunder's crash, the vanquisht's groan, the victor's shout o'er all! 

Sublime, thou call'st the storm at sea, the wind and wave contending, — 
Sublime, the earthquake suddenly the very mountains rending, — 
And the volcano belching fire and smoke for miles afar, — 
But what are these but bubbles when compared with human war ! 

Consider, for a moment, Man, the all-involving world 
Turned outside-in in flesh and blood, and into action whirled — 
Sphere crushing sphere, sun burning sun, an universal jar ! — 
And thou canst measure if thou wilt the majesty of war ! 

But why this eulogy of war, this bright and happy day. 

Within this peace-appareled wood, in holiday array. 

Where men and women, boys and girls, commingle without strife, 

As if with darkness Death had left the world to light and Life ! 

Here, where we stand, the battle raged : the hosts contending, those 
Whom time and place and circumstance had made relentless foes — 
The Civilized and Savage man — the White and Red of hue — 
The East and West of place of birth — the Old World and the New ! 

A symbol battle of the world ! A race opposing race. 
Expanding in significance throughout all time and space ; 
The victory declaring for the good above the evil, — 
Life over Death, — Heaven over Hell, — a God above a Devil ! 

In proof whereof, The Continent, from one sea to the other, 
To fifty millions of mankind a mighty nation- mother ! — 



20 The Bouquet Celebration. 

Her breasts outnumbering countlessly the dugs of the Diana 

The old Ephesians painted black — Earth bearing Man and Manna ! 

A mother to increase until exhausted with old age, 

Five hundred million softs or more in civil strife engage — 

Depopulating cities, states — leaving the land a prey 

To those by might and worth decreed, a better race than they ! 

So Rome and Greece, and Egypt fell — the glories of an age, 
In the unfinished book of time a multilated page ; 
Like ox and ass with broken backs, their usefulness outlived, 
The world the better for their death, their ultimate achieved ! 

So Turkey, China fall to-day — their masses much more fit 
To mingle with the mundane mud than to emerge from it ; 
Like the Great Auk and Dodo, or the Saurians of the Past, 
The world the better for their bones in solid stone encased ! 

Then let the cheer go round and round, for war, relentless war ! 
That purifies the planet till it glows a heavenly star ! 
Sweeping away the weak and vile — as in this very wood — 
Leaving ttie globe a heritance to him of worthiest blood ! 

Aye, let the cheer go round and round, in honor of the few 
Who on this field of battle won a New World for their due — 
This glorious Land of Liberty ! the worth-reward of Man ! 
America, the Mighty, where HE IS THE KING THAT CAN ! 

This closed the literary exercises of the forenoon. It 
was now after twelve o'clock and the meeting took a recess 
for dinner. 

DINNER. 

In families and groups of families the vast assemblage 
partook of a pic-nic dinner in the grove and adjacent fields. 
Everybody seemed to be in excellent spirits and a grand 
good time they had of it. The trip to the battle-field, the 
bracing and balmy air and the pleasurable excitement of the 
occasion added a relish to the repast by increasing the 
keenness of the appetite. The lemonade and restaurant 
stands did a thriving business. Not a few persons lost their 
friends in the crowd and had to depend upon some good 
Samaritan for rations. Rev. Cort, in a vain attempt to find 
his commissary stores, ran across Gen. Beaver and his three 
boys who had just come upon the grounds. The General's 
horses were provided for in Wannamaker's barn and the 



The Dinner. 21 

party then set out in search of friends with whom they ex- 
pected to get dinner. But it was a useless seach amid that 
seething mass of humanity. Messrs. Hazlet and Stark, with 
their families, had just finished a sumptuous repast but had 
plenty and to spare. The overplus they kindly placed at 
the disposal of the General, the preacher and the boys, all 
of whom heartily enjoyed their improvised meal at the edge 
of the grove. The General then made a rapid survey of 
the field of battle, springing along so nimbly and rapidly 
on his crutches that his clerical guide had hard work to 
keep up as he sought to explain the respective positions of 
Bouquet's Highlanders, Royal Americans and Rangers on the 
one hand and that of their savage assailants on the other. 
All this while Col. Geo. F. Huff, ex-Gov. Latta and other 
members of the Reception Committee were on the lookout 
for Gen. Beaver in order to furnish him escort and enter- 
tainment. The afternoon proceedings, however, brought 
all speakers and committees into right relation with each 
other at the grand stand. 

A little Indian (Guyatau or Guito) of the Seneca tribe, 
from the Cattaraugus Reservation, under the care of Mr. 
Gibson, of Dunbar, Fayette county, Pa., was on the stand, 
dressed up in full Indian costume and attracted great atten- 
tion. Guyasutha, the chief of the Senecas located in Ohio, 
was the leading spirit among the Indians in this battle and 
in the siege of Fort Pitt and subsequently in the attack on 
Hannastown. (See appendix). Hence this little copper- 
colored, dark-eyed Indian, with tomahawk and other war- 
like equipments, was looked upon as a representative of the 
vanishing race of red men who made these woods hideous 
with their war-whoops 120 years ago to-day. Guyatau or 
Guito is seven years old and a smart looking Indian boy. 
In striking contrast with him in appearance and historical 
association there sat with his mother on the same platform, 
a few feet distance from Guyatau, Ralph Bouquet, a fair- 
skinned, light-haired, rosy-cheeked, blue-eyed white boy, 
the four-year-old son of Rev. Cyrus Cort, and the great- 
great-great-grandson of Andrew Byerly, the founder of 
Byerly's Station at Bushy Run about 1760, and an import- 
ant actor in the bloody drama enacted on these hills in 



22 The Bouquet Celebration. 

those trying days of yore. Andrew Byerly was one of the 
advance guard of eighteen who received the first fire of the 
savages, Aug. 5, 1763, on Gongaware's hill — twelve of the 
eighteen fell — two companies of the Highlanders rushed for- 
ward to the rescue when the conflict soon raged, not only in 
the front, but on both flanks and the rear, for the savges had 
completely surrounded Bouquet and his little army. Byerly 
rendered valuable service during the fight, and at the im- 
minent risk of his life, carried water in his hat to the 
wounded Highlanders famishing from thirst during the ter- 
rible night of suffering and suspense between the two days of 
conflict. (For fuller notice of Andrew Byerly, &c., see 
pages 23, &c., 51, &c., of pamphlet on ''Col. Henry Bou- 
quet and His Campaigns.") 

AFTERNOON PROCEEDINGS AND SPEECHES. 

The appearance of General Beaver on the platform, ere" 
ated great enthusiasm among the assembled multitude which 
had now crowded together again in front of the speaker's 
stand. 

The sea of smiling faces, the thousands of handsome and 
well dressed ladies and their gallant escorts, parents with 
their children, beaux with their sweethearts, sitting and 
standing among the forest trees and anxious to see and hear 
the one-legged hero, whose blood had been poured out so 
freely on so many battle-fields of the Republic, presented a 
scene never to be forgotten by those who were privileged to 
behold it. Visitors from a distance spoke with admira- 
tion of the fine appearance and excellent behavior of the 
people. Everybody seemed happy and anxious to promote 
the comfort and happiness of their fellows. There was one 
drawback, however. Eight brass bands were scattered 
through the grove, and each of these bands seemed to think 
that they ought to be heard whenever they felt like blowing 
their horns. Rev. W. W. Moorehead, of Greensburg, Pa., 
had offered an appropriate and fervent prayer, and General 
Coulter had introduced General Beaver amid the applause 
of 10,000 enthusiastic people. But still the bands kept 
tooting away. By extra effort on the part of his aids, com- 



Address of Gen. James A. Beaver. 23 

parative quiet was' secured, and General B., in a pleasant 
manner and loud, clear voice, proceeded to speak as follows : 

ADDRESS OF GENERAL JAMES A. BEAVER, OF BELLEFONTE, PA. 

Ladies and Gentlemen : — I confess to you that my com- 
ing here to-day has been more for my own gratification and 
instruction than with the hope or for the purpose of saying 
anything either to gratify or to instruct the good people of 
Westmoreland county. My boys and I have driven more 
than 160 miles from our home rather for the purpose of 
learning what Westmoreland county is, and what has been 
done by your ancestors both for you and for us, than for the 
purpose of adding to your knowledge of history or of the 
men who made history, or of increasing the pride and in- 
tensifying the interest which you must have in the historical 
associations which crowd around this locality and this oc- 
casion. (At this point the music of a brass band almost 
drowned the speaker's voice, and he laughingly exclaimed : 
"There is too much of this thing; I never could blow 
against a brass band." The crowd joined in a hearty 
laugh and General Coulter leaning far over the railing 
toward the unruly musicians shouted : " Are there not 
enough good people out there to stop that band ?" But the 
band played on. The crowd still seemed to enjoy it. Gen. 
Beaver after waiting a minute turned to those in the im- 
mediate neighborhood and said : '' Coulter forgets that he 
is not commanding a brigade ; there was a time when he 
could say to a brass band, stop, and it stopped ; play, and 
it played ; but that time has gone by, my old friend, the 
brass band is on top." Renewed laughter.) Order being 
finally restored the speaker continued : 

Coming from our home in Bellefonte south of Bedford, 
and then turning westward, we endeavored to follow the 
old military road that was laid out for General Forbes by 
Colonel Bouquet (or rather by Col. Burd under Bouquet's 
supervision), to Ligonier which was afterwards extended by 
Washington to Fort Pitt. We were unable to follow its im- 
mediate route altogether, inasmuch as it has been replaced 
by roads with better grades which cross it ; but following 



24 The Bouquet Celebration. 

the same general direction we gathered enough to see, and 
in some measure to understand how the men who established 
our civilization were compelled to toil and to march, and 
to suffer in order that we might enjoy the civilization and 
the advantages which we have to-day. It is a wonderful 
inspiration for a Pennsylvanian who has some knowledge of 
the history of this general locality to come over these moun- 
tains, and recall as he crosses them how much our fathers 
labored and suffered and wrought out in toil and blood in 
order that they might hand over to us the great heritage of 
civilization and of freedom which we enjoy, and which we 
are bound to preserve and hand over to our children and 
children's children. I have lately re-read some of the history 
which relates to the expedition under the command of Col. 
Bouquet, which left Bedford with the design and for the 
purpose of relieving the beleaguered garrison at Fort Pitt. 
It is a wonderful story, full of romance and daring, but I do 
not propose to go into its historical details. All who are 
here have doubtless heard of the gallant commander of the 
expedition. Col. Henry Bouquet. He was a man of the 
most wonderful versatility and varied acquirements and of 
undaunted bravery, and yet, of such wisdom and gentleness 
that he was enabled to secure the co-operation of the people 
of the eastern part of the State, who, it must be confessed, 
were at that time a little ''twisty " and unwilling to give 
th^-t cordial help and co-operation in military campaigns 
that were absolutely necessary to secure the full fruits of vic- 
tory. Bouquet, by his wisdom and gentleness quite won 
the admiration of our Quaker population in the eastern 
part of the State, and succeeded in procuring with their ap- 
parent sanction the necessary votes of supplies and men 
which enabled him to make his subsequent 1764 campaign, 
which brought permanent peace to the frontier settlers until 
the war of Revolution began. This is not the time nor the 
place, nor does it fall to my province to recount the details 
of the campaigns of which the battle of Bushy Run was a 
part, nor yet to sketch the life and character of the gallant 
commander who displayed such heroic bravery and wise in- 
telligence in making the dispositions of his forces, which 
enabled him to win immediate victory upon the field which 



Address of Gen. James A. Beaver. 25 

is in our sight. There are certain practical questions which 
grow out of this event which, it seems to me, press upon 
our attention, and should receive our careful consideration. 
Go to yonder hill-top and picture if you can how this wise, 
brave Swiss Colonel protected his 340 pack-horses and their 
drivers (for those of you who had experience in the army 
will readily understand that the drivers were harder to 
manage than the horses), and surrounded on all sides by 
hordes of savages, who were confident of the scalps and 
supplies of the little army which they had surrounded, not 
only saved his transportation and supplies, but by skillfull 
manoeuvring and brave fighting after a two days' battle 
drove the savages from their well chosen position, and fin- 
ally gained the object of his expedition. No stretch of our 
imagination can picture to us the kind of warfare which 
was carried on to protect our fathers against the savage 
hordes who were trying their utmost to blot out the little 
spark of civilization which was lighted in this Western 
region, and which the early settlers were than trying to fan 
into a flame. Those of us who have some knowledge of 
modern warfare and some experience in the late war so 
happily ended, can scarcely conceive of the situation in 
which this little army of Bouquet was placed. 

You remember, my comrades, that if we did not have 
about three days' rations in our haversacks, and fully five 
days more in the wagon train, and if we did not have 
further, a railroad or a river by which to bring up our sup- 
plies, and a telegraph line to keep us in communication 
with the outside world, we were supposed to be in danger 
of being cut off and "gobbled up." But here is a man 
with less than a thousand men ; aye, with less than half of 
that number, who struck out from Bedford across the moun- 
tains by a road which had been constructed some five years 
before, who left his wagon train at Fort Ligonier and started 
thence with all his supplies upon pack-horses with his rangers, 
his Royal Americans, his Highlanders and his Light Infantry 
through the wilderness to relieve the beleaguered fort at 
the junction of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers. 
The mode of warfare is so thoroughly foreign to our present 
conceptions of military operations that no stretch of the 

^^"" ?>. 



26 The Bouquet Celebration. 

imagination, I say, can enable us to comprehend what was 
involved in the campaign to which we have referred, and 
which was carried to such a successful issue by Col. Bouquet. 
My admiration for the man, however, has led me to wander, 
and I come back to the practical thought which I wish 
especially to present, which is this : that as the men whom 
we have in mind to-day lived and labored, and some of 
them laid down their lives for us and for what we hold most 
dear to us, so we are to see to it not only that what was left 
us should be preserved and handed down to our children, 
but that their memories should be perpetuated in an endur- 
ing way, so that our children and our children's children 
may learn what was done on these hills, before the remem- 
brance of it has faded out of the minds of men and locali- 
ties can no longer be clearly designated. We, in Pennsylva- 
nia have less of local pride and of interest in our local history 
than have the people either of New England or New York \ 
as a consequence, many localities full of historical and 
romantic interest are unmarked and comparatively unknown. 
We have in this State a society known as the Historical 
Society of Pennsylvania, whose headquarters are in Phila- 
delphia. It is doing a vast amount of good in preserving 
the early records of our settlers, and publishing them 
through the medium of the Pennsylvania Magazine. This 
society, however, is unfortunately largely local in its agencies 
and ends, and therefore local in its results. Its aim is to 
reach out through the entire State and to enlist the interest 
and co-operation of men in every section. Unfortunately, 
however, it has been unable so far to do this as fully as we 
could wish. Although I live east of the Allegheny moun- 
tains, we, of that locality are classed and have come to 
consider ourselves as belonging to Western Pennsylvania. 
It would be much better if we could co-operate with the 
society of which I have spoken, but if this cannot be done, 
we should undoubtedly seek to co-operate with a similar 
society which has been organized in Pittsburg for the bene- 
fit of that locality and, I take it, for that of all Western 
Pennsylvania. Through one or the other of these agencies 
not only should what has been written with reference to this 
battle be preserved, but the relics which remain of it and 



Address of Gen. James A. Beaver 27 

everything which relates to it should be gathered and de- 
posited under their auspices. 

Here is a bayonet ; it formed a part of the equipment of 
one of the Highlanders, doubtless, before whose terrific 
bayonet charge the Indian gave way. It should be placed 
where it would become an object lesson to all beholders of 
the fight at Bushy Run and should stimulate inquiry in re- 
gard to that battle and those who took part in it. Local 
historical societies in connection with either one -or the 
other of the greater societies already named, should be or- 
ganized in our several localities so as to co-operate with 
them and secure for them just such relics as I have mentioned. 
The place where the battle was fought should be so marked 
that coming generations would have no difficulty in telling 
where it is and learn through its monuments of the heroism 
of those who won its great victory. Monuments which 
would serve tell not only where the battle was fought and 
the victory won, but who fell in the fight, and who they 
were and what they did in winning it. We are brought face 
to face to-day with this bit of colonial history. We learn 
more than we have ever known perhaps of Col. Bouquet 
and his little army — of their bravery and of his wisdom 
and courage ; and yet he has largely dropped out of Ameri- 
can history as it is learned by the masses of this generation. 
Over these hill-tops his "name ought to be perpetuated. 
Through the influence of this day the memory of his 
achievements should be revived ; and their influence in 
shaping the welfare of this region gratefully recalled. One 
of the boasts of my lineage is that I am mainly of Penn- 
sylvania German stock. There is good reason perhaps,, 
why the memory of Col. Bouquet and his followers is so 
little regarded. Following his campaigns, came the excit- 
ing events which culminated in the war of the Revolution. 
That, of course, to us Americans was the great event in our 
history. Our interest centres in that; and our American 
historians are more interested in preserving the names of 
the men who participated in it, than those brave spirits who 
served the mother country in the Indian wars which pre- 
ceded it. Thi,s perhaps, is the reason why the memory of 
Washington, St. Clair and Mad Anthony Wayne over- 



28 The Bouquet Celebration. 

shadows, and their achievements overtop, and to a great 
extent blot out the memory and achievements of this brave 
German-Swiss. We have a history of which we need not 
be ashamed. Let us be interested in preserving it and 
making it known to the world and to our descendants. We 
owe it to those who made the history ; we owe it to our- 
selves ; we owe it to those who are to come after us. Let us 
therefore co-operate with Judge Parke and Mr. Bigham 
and the other gentlemen who have come here from Pitts- 
burg and are interested in preserving the historical records 
of this region of Western Pennsylvania. 

It is a great pleasure, I assure you, to join with you in the 
commemoration of this great event. I see not only West- 
moreland, but Armstrong, Allegheny, Fayette and other 
counties represented on these grounds. Such gatherings 
are good, not only because they remind us of what others 
have done and suffered, but because of the social features 
which surround them, and other opportunities thus afforded 
for renewing old friendships and making new ones. Grate- 
fully mindful of the men and the achievements of the past, 
true to obligations of the present and trustful as to the 
future, let us gather up the lessons of to-day, and carry them 
with us as an inspiration and an incentive in the life- which 
we are to live for the benefit not of ourselves alone, but of 
those who are about us and are to come after us. 



At the close and also frequently during the progress of 
his speech, the sentiments of General Beaver were greeted 
witlj hearty applause. 

Hon. John E. Parke, of Pittsburg, president of the 
Western Pennsylvania Historical Society, delivered the fol- 
lowing address on the French and Indian war and the 
causes that led to the same, &c. 



Address of Judge John E. Parke. 29 

ADDRESS OF JUDGE JOHN E. PARKE.* 
PONTIAC'S PLOT. 

We have been called together this day to celebrate one 
of the most important and interesting events connected with 
the history of our country. On this spot, sacred to the 
memory of the past, one hundred and twenty years ago, the 
gallant and accomplished Col. Henry Bouquet, with his 
heroic little band of Highlanders and Anglo-Americans, 
having passed the rugged and dangerous defiles of the Alle- 
gheny, arrived at Bushy Run, August 5, 1763. 

The prominent events connected with Bouquet's expedi- 
tion, and their subsequent development into permanent set- 
tlements, the ingredients of which are of the highest import- 
ance in perpetuating the fame of these gallant men, who 
left the confines of civilization to brave the dangers of an 
unknown country, the simple outline of which, when drawn 
with fidelity, possess marvelous interest to the student of 
nature. The elaboration of these events I will leave to 
others more competent to do justice to the subject. 

The imagination fails to conceive incidents more roman- 
tic, than those which sober truth reveals in the career of 
those who penetrated the Western wilds in order to create 
new homes for themselves and families, impelled by those 
powerful motives of human action — ambition and a love of 
liberty. 

In the career of many of the early adventurers, we see 
these passions overruling all others. They stand out in bold 
relief as grand heroes worthy of a representation in the an- 
nals of the country. In the delineation of their deeds, and 
of those who follow after them, who occupied what they 
had won, by faith, courage and indomitable perseverance, 
are prominent features in the picture. These were the nec- 
essary elements of success in the wide and dangerous fields 
of adventure, and were ever present in great abundance 
when required in laying the foundation of their future 
homes. 

♦Judge Parke had engaged to secure the attendance of W. D. Moore, Esq., 
of Pittsburg, but that gentleman was unable to fulfill the engagement, and up- 
on a few hours' notice, the Judge was obliged to prepare nimself to fill his 
place. 



30 The Bouquet Celebration. 

Many of the events which have rendered Western Penn- 
sylvania conspicuous in the history of the past, leave their 
impress on the mind of every American citizen. They pass 
before us as a mighty vision, making us feel the poverty of 
language and weakness of eloquence when startling realities 
are to be described. 

Old Westmoreland, whose vast territory at an early day 
extended so as to embace nearly all the territory lying west- 
ward from the foot hills of the Alleghenies to the Virginia 
borders, may be justly styled the Mother of the Western 
Counties, and her soil was among the first points selected 
by the hardy pioneer and venturesome scout to commence 
the work of civilization. 

Here all the embarrassments of a new settlement were en- 
countered. The terrible conflicts with the cruel and treach- 
erous red men, isolation from society, cut off from aid and 
intercourse with the Atlantic seaboard, were evils of no or- 
dinary magnitude. 

The rugged passes of the Alleghenies then presented a 
formidable barrier, and the traveler who passed them, found 
himself, as it were, in a new world, where he was compelled 
to defend himself or perish. A continual conflict was 
waged between the sturdy pioneer and his implacable In- 
dian foeman. These conflicts were for life and all that made 
life dear, and were, however, only marked individual acts of 
heroism, which produced none of those events affecting 
national greatness, which it is the province of the historian 
to record. They will, therefore, find no place in the an- 
nals of our country, yet it is to be hoped, nevertheless, that 
the indomitable reporter will start out in quest of tradition- 
ary lore, who will patiently listen to the reminiscences of 
hoary-headed men, and laboriously glean the frail and frag- 
mentary memorials of other days. 

Then will the hardy pioneer and gallant conqueror of the 
country, of which we are so proud, find a place, if not with 
heroes of history, at least with heroes of romance. 

The early exploration of Westmoreland county by these 
avant couriers of civilization, of which there is no authentic 
record, are well calculated to excite an interest in the breast 



Address of Judge John E. Parke. 31 

of every American citizen, especially those to the ** manor 
born." 

We can scarcely realize the wondrous changes that have 
occurred in our midst, even within the compass of our own 
recollection. Before the introduction of steamboats, or 
street railways were invented, ere the lightning telegraph and 
telephone had annihilated space, or the steam horse ren- 
dered distance a myth, a long time ago, to the Indian war- 
whoop and the midnight howl of the wolf, to the light of 
burning cabins, now succeed the sound of the steam whistle, 
the light of glowing furnaces, the sound of the ponderous 
engine, clang of machinery, and the whirr and clatter of 
the shuttle and cotton spindle. 

Over this territory, hallowed by the memory of the past, 
the merciless red man roamed, and who claimed the country 
from the foothills of the Alleghenies to the great lakes of 
the North, over which he ruled, bidding defiance to his in- 
domitable Anglo-Saxon foe. 

The startling war-whoop, and the no less appalling cry of 
the panther, struck terror into the hearts of all who had the 
temerity to venture within the depths of the gloomy for- 
ests. 

Westward through the wilderness led the great Indian 
trail to the mouth of the Beaver ; thence in a northwesterly 
direction to Sandusky and Detroit ; following the ridges, it 
passed through Trumbull and Portage counties, Ohio, clear- 
ly defined by stone-piles and marked trees. Near the con- 
fluence of the Mahoning and Shenango, forming the Bea- 
ver, another trail crossed, following a more westerly direc- 
tion to the Tuscarawas branch of the Muskingum. Over 
these trails these wild denizens made their periodical raids, 
unchecked, towards the settlements, except when opposed 
by the avant couriers of civilization, the venturesome 
pioneer and brave and hardy scout. Notwithstanding the 
important treaties that had been made with them from time 
to time, they still continued their atrocities upon the de- 
fenseless pioneer, who had the hardihood to brave the dan- 
ger consequent upon the settlement of an unknown coun- 
try. 

The memorable struggles between the legions of France 



32 The Bouquet Celebration. 

and the battalions of England for the supremacy in the 
great Northwest, during which time the gorgeous Fleur de 
Lis and the royal banner of St. George waved successively 
over the battlements of old Fort Duquesne, was happily de- 
termined by the peace of 1763. Negotiations with this view 
were entered into during the year 1762, and were finally 
consummated early in the following year. By the condition 
of the treaty, France agreed to surrender absolutely all her 
possessions in North America to England. Anticipating an 
early peace, the former made a secret covenant with Spain, 
ceding to that nation the territoi'y of Louisiana, (in the year 
1800 it was re-ceded to France, and in 1803 was purchased 
by the United States for ^15,000,000), which at the time 
embraced a large portion of the Southwest. The object of 
this secret covenant was evidently to keep from under the 
control of their hereditary enemy, the free navigation of 
waters flowing through the Mississippi and Ohio Valleys 
within the ceded territory. This deception was not appar- 
ent during the negotiation ; it was only made so at the time 
of the execution of the treaty. This covert disposition of 
the territory, which they failed to maintain by the prestige 
of arms, was a diplomatic trick, seriously involving their 
national honor, and which came near defeating the object. 
In view of the prostration of the country by the recent war, 
England resolved to accept the situation, trusting in their 
ability to acquire in the future the peaceful possession of the 
disputed territory. 

With the restoration of peace, it was confidently hoped 
that it would forever end the troubles and difficulties with 
the Indians, who were, with a few exceptions, the allies of 
France. This, however, was a fatal mistake, as it proved 
the prelude to a most cruel and devastating war, destructive 
alike to life and property throughout the entire Western 
frontier. The contemplated and simultaneous uprising of 
the several hostile tribes was so unexpected that the out- 
posts were in a great measure unprepared to repel success- 
fully, their murderous onslaughts, except in the instance of 
the attack on Fort Pitt, Detroit and Ligonier. 

Hitherto the Indians who had been held in subjection by 
the French had been won over by a doubtful diplomacy 



Address of Judge John E. Parke. 33 

and apparent kindness, so that the relations existing be- 
tween them were of the most friendly character. 

When, however, they discovered that they were to be 
handed over under the treaty to their foe, they indignantly 
refused to consent thereto. The onward and steady pro- 
gress of civilization carried forward by the indomitable 
Anglo-Saxon race, assured them that submission on their 
part would end in extermination ; to prevent such a calamity, 
then was the time to act, while the forts were feeble and 
wide apart, and the settlements scattered and thinly popu- 
lated. 

The war familarily known as the Pontiac war, so called 
because this great war chief was the genius who devised and 
inaugurated it, and who carried it on with that relentness, 
cruelty so characteristic of the North American Indian. 
Pontiac' s personal efforts, however, were confined chiefly to 
the neighborhood around Detroit and the lakes, while the 
operations on the borders of the Ohio were entrusted to 
warriors equally fierce and unrelenting. 

As far as the English and Colonists were concerned, the 
contests were principally confined to Forts Pitt, Detroit and 
Ligonier. All the frontier forts, except those three and 
Niagara, fell without an effort at defense, the latter was con- 
sidered too well fortified to be molested, so that the three 
former were the only ones that successfully resisted the ad- 
vancing tide of savage vengeance ; whilst there was nothing 
left of the unfortunate garrisons and the settlements around 
them but a mass of smouldering ruins. Immured within 
the gloomy depths of a mighty wilderness, isolated from all 
intercourse with civilization, these gallant defenders not 
only maintainted their posts, but actually carried the war 
into the heart of the enemy's country, and, at the point of 
the bayonet, wrung from them an unwilling peace. 

The movements, therefore, on these three forts, and the ex- 
pedition that subsequently went out from them against the 
savages, comprises the entire history of the wars as far as it 
relates to our own military movements. The sparse and 
scattered locations of our frontier defenses through the vast 
wilderness lying between the great Northern lakes and the 
Ohio and Misissippi Valleys, were but rude log enclosures, 
2^ 



34 The Bouquet Celebration. 

principally located on the lines of water communications, 
but frequently met with in the heart of the forests, gar- 
risoned by a mere handful of soldiers, and the emblem of 
sovereignty floating above them, seemed more of burlesque 
than the distinguishing mark of a mighty and powerful na- 
tion. These forts, situated so distant from each other, were 
but mere dots in the interminable wilderness. 

The presence and maintenance of these isolated outposts 
inflamed the spirits of the haughty chiefs, who had the saga- 
city to believe that if the struggle for the supremacy was 
maintained and accomplished by their foes, it would be the 
foreshadowing of the red man's coming fate. 

To resist this encroachment on their rights, the head 
chiefs of the various tribes who inhabited the country, then 
only known and travelled by their own hunting and war 
parties, determined to crush out at once the power of their 
foes. 

The Shawnees, Delawares, Senecas, Wyandots and Mi- 
amis, who considered themselves the exclusive masters of 
the territory, being moved by their hatred and fear of their 
Anglo-Saxon foemen, joined together in a common cause, 
in order to wipe out at once, by a simultaneous movement, 
the further progress of civilization. 

Although rumors of this confederation occasionally 
reached the military authorities, they did not wholly ignore 
them, but rather treated them with a cool indifference, 
highly discreditable to their military education, for if prompt 
measures had been carried out on the first intimation of 
alarm, the sacrifice of life and the destruction of the out- 
posts might have been prevented. 

It was in consequence of this fatal indifference that when 
the storm burst upon the forts and defenseless settlements, it 
came like the mighty tornado, carrying terror and destruc- 
tion as it sweeps its irresistible course. 

The period of time selected by the tribe to carry into ef- 
fect their purposes, evinced their profound knowledge and 
sagacity. Operations were delayed until the harvests were 
safely garnered, so that their foes with the provisions pro- 
vided for their sustenance, might be destroyed at the same 



Address of Judge John E. Parke. 35 

time — thus clearing the wilderness of their foes, at least, for 
the time being. 

Fort LaBoeuf, on French creek, Venango on the Alle- 
gheny, Presque Isle, on Lake Erie, La Bay, on Lake Mich- 
igan, St. Joseph, Miami, Sandusky and Michilmackinas, 
went down in gloom one after another, with scarcely 'any re- 
sistance. Many of them fell by stratagem, and their gar- 
risons were cruelly massacred ; others capitulated and shared 
the same fate ; out of all, only one, LaBceuf escaped. The 
defense of the latter proved futile, the Indians having suc- 
ceeded in firing the adjacent buildings. The garrison took 
refuge in the woods, and ultimately escaped. 

The royal banner of St. George, wherever it floated over 
mountain, prairie and stream within these vast domains, was 
stricken down. Forts Pitt, Niagara, Ligonier and Detroit 
still remained intact, and the hardy settlers who had escaped 
the murderous tomahawk and scalping-knife, fled for safety 
within their protecting walls. The intrepid trapper and ven- 
turesome trader were followed up with untiring zeal, arid 
when taken, were horribly tortured and ruthlessly butchered 
in cold blood, in a manner only known and practiced by 
these human sleuth-hounds. 

The stout pioneer in the clearng, and the loved ones in 
the log cabin, fell alike before the rifle and tomahawk. 

The sound of the woodman's axe and the boom of the 
morning and evening gun of the lonely forts went down in 
silence together, and the fires of civilization and the smoke 
thereof, as it gracefully ascended above the tree tops, were ex 
tinguished in blood. Those who escaped the murderous 
raid left their rude homes to the torch of the foe, and 
sought safety in flight, carrying with them a tale of blood 
and cruelty, the bare recital of which filled the border set- 
tlements with terror and dismay. In the midst of these scenes 
of gloom and desolation, the indomitable defenders of Forts 
Pitt, Detroit and Ligonier watched with vigilance the move- 
ments of their treacherous assailants, thus assuring the safety 
of the forts, their flags gallantly spread to the breeze, the only 
emblems of Anglo-Saxon power and of civilization in a 
land now covered with teeming cities, girdled by the wires 
of the electric telegraph, and traversed by a mighty network 
of railroads. 



36 The Bouquet Celebration. 

Judge Parke was followed by Hon. T. J. Bigham, of 
Pittsburg, who spoke as follows : 

ADDRESS OF HON. T. J. BIGHAM. 

I have attended, I believe, all the historical celebrations 
in Westmoreland county of late years. Some years ago I 
attended the celebration at Greensburg, and I was at Han- 
nastown one year ago. I am not in good health. My wife 
let me come here on condition that I would not make a 
speech. I am a native of this county, having been born at 
the other end of the manor. I was born and lived there 
until I went to college. My ancestors settled there about 
two years after this battle at Bushy Run. We did not cele- 
brate the one hundreth anniversary of this battle, as the 
battle of Gettysburg occurred just about that time. 

At the time of the Bushy Run battle this county was in 
Cumberland — -the capital was Carlisle. At one time it in- 
cluded nearly the whole of Western Pennsylvania. This 
was all called Mother Cumberland, just after the battle of 
Bushy Run. I am in favor of preserving the records of the 
early history of Westmoreland. I am seventy-four years 
old and have been, next to Judge Parke, the most busily en- 
gaged in the old historical celebrations. There was one or 
two battles in Fayette county, by Washington, and one in 
Armstrong. Col. Armstrong led all Pennsylvanians to 
Kittanning, and destroyed that nest of Indians. I always 
like to attend these meetings if I am able to get out at all. 

The old Residenter's Society of Pittsburg is designed to 
imitate the Historical Society of Pennsylvania. Judge 
Parke wishes to enlarge this society. Most people have lost 
a knowledge of the French and Indian war. A reporter 
came up to me and asked me about this war. I said ^' Is it 
possible that the young generation don't know anything 
about this war?" France claimed to have discovered the 
mouth of the Mississippi river, also the St. Lawrence. It 
was then a kind of rule that the nation that discovered the 
mouth of the river had the right to the territory which it 
drained. France claimed every foot of ground that she 
thought was hers, and named it New France. 

Louis XIV., in the estimation of the French, was a grand 



Address of Hon. T. J. Bigham. 37 

monarch, and he claimed all the country west of the Mis- 
sissippi and Ohio. Louis XXV entertained the same idea. 
The English had settled east of the Allegheny mountains. 
The English charter included all the country from ocean to 
ocean. We passed through the country where Braddock 
was defeated in July, 1755, this morning. In 1758 William 
Pitt, after whom Pittsburg is named, was called to the helm 
of the British Empire. He was the greatest statesman of 
the last century; no European statesman excelled him. 
Before this time the armies in America had bad leaders. 
Pitt sent good men to take command. Wolfe and Forbes 
were sent over to fight the French and Indians. The war 
continued some seven or eight months and was ended just 
before the battle of Bushy Run. Great Britain never was 
so powerful as she was at that time. The whole of this 
country east of the Mississippi was owned by her. In India 
war was carried on, and the whole of that country, with a 
population greater than the United States to-day, was ceded 
to England. She was never so great a nation as at that 
time, not even after the battle of Waterloo, where the whole 
of Europe was repulsed. Our interests were with Great 
Britain, and I think if England had not succeeded in the 
French and Indian war we would not be as far on in indus- 
try and civilization as we are at the present time. 

Pontiac is said to have led part of the force which de- 
feated Braddock. He summoned his men and made a great 
speech, in which he told them that the Great Spirit had come 
to them and they resolved that they would destroy our an- 
cestors. The tempest broke out in June. Guyasootha was 
the commander of the party which attacked this place. He 
was the principal man that led the warriors under Pontiac. 
Pontiac himself was besieging Detroit. It is not known 
definitely that Guyasootha was the commander in the battle, 
but it is highly probable he was here. I rejoice that Bouquet 
was successful. They attempted to play the same trick on 
Bouquet as they did on Braddock, but he turned the tables 
on them. They fought the whole afternoon of the fifth, night 
parted them and they fought the battle again the next day. 

This place was a sort of half-way station between Ligonier 
and Fort Pitt. He intended to rest his men at Bushy Run 



38 The Bouquet Celebration. 

and march through the wilderness near Turtle Creek at 
night, where he expected to meet the Indians. At this 
battle he managed his men in two files. He then sent for- 
ward two companies to make the attack, but this was a 
failure. 

The Indians supposed this to be a real retreat, and got 
out from the woods and then had to fight Bouquet's men on 
both sides. That was just the reverse of the position in 
which Braddock was. The Indians in the woods were 
formidable, but out of them the white man could get the 
best of them. Bouquet just re-acted Braddock's Field, but 
got the Indians into the trap. After they were driven back 
they fled away to the Muskingum country. Some time ago 
some young lawyers came in my office, and I asked them if 
they knew who Bouquet was ? My son spoke up and said 
that he was a Frenchman. 

I request that the people of Harrison City petition the 
Court to change the name of Harrison City to that of Bou- 
quet. It would mean something to have Bouquet City in- 
stead of Harrison City. 

From infancy I heard talk of the burning of Hannastown. 
Braddock forbid his men to get behind trees but made them 
keep in regular order, and in this way the Indians had the 
advantage. 

Bouquet made another tour in 1764 into the Muskingum 
country to effect a treaty with the Indians in which he was 
successful. In 1 765 he was sent to Florida. He contracted 
a fever there and died. 

In 1762 all the country east of the Mississippi was ceded 
to the English. Pontiac did not hate the French as much 
as he did the English, for he knew they would not harm 
so much in the way of making settlements and in cultivat- 
ing land. The Anglo-Saxons were industrious. My an- 
cestors were Irish. If the French were industrious they 
could have found plenty to do in the Mississippi valley. 

THE CONCLUSION. 

When Judge Bigham's speech was ended the benediction 
was pronounced by Rev. D. B. Lady, of Manor, and the 



Review of the Grand Army Posts. 39 

literary exercises of the day were brought to a close between 
three and four o'clock in the afternoon. 

Letters were received from distinguished gentlemen of 
our own and other lands, some of which are hereto appended. 

REVIEW OF THE GRAND ARMY POSTS. 

While Gen. R. Coulter was presiding at the speaker's 
stand during the delivery of the last two addresses, Gen. 
James A. Beaver, Gen. Thomas F. Gallagher, Col. John 
Johnston and other military men reviewed the Grand Army 
Posts on the top of Gongaware's Hill, the scene of the first 
day's fight between the Indians and the two companies of 
Highlanders and where a large number of Bouquet's men 
were buried at the close of the battle. 

G. A. R. Post, No. 4, of Latrobe, arrived in the grove 
on Sunday evening and encamped there during the night. 
On Monday they were joined by two brass bands from that 
place and others of their comrades until their number 
reached about 50. Irwin Post, (190) mustering 75 men 
and headed by the Paintertown cornet band, and Turtle 
Creek Post, (199) with 25 men and a martial band, arrived 
early in the day. Later the Greensburg Post, with 40 
members and a martial band, and Fort Ligonier Post, with 
40 members and a brass band, reached the grove. Still 
later the Sewickley Cavalry, commanded by Capt. Samuel 
Bell and Lieuts. Millken, Martin and McCune, 70 strong, 
and headed by a martial band, rode up to the rendezvous 
of rejoicing. There were other members of Posts in 
neighboring towns and counties in attendance, but not as 
organizations. The excellent Salem cornet band and Citi- 
zens' band of Greensburg were likewise present and added 
their harmonious strains to the almost ceaseless flow of music 
during the day. 

Headed by the Citizens' band, of Greensburg, the battle- 
scarred veterans to the number of about 300 with their 
respective bands, made a few evolutions around' the hill-top 
and then marched past the Generals in fine style. They 
were followed by the Cavalry in picturesque costumes. 

The distinguished reviewers expressed themselves highly 
gratified with the military display. 



40 The Bouquet Celebration, 

Shortly before the review began Rev. C. Cort introduced 
Revs. A. E. Truxal, John W. Love, Geo. H. Johnston, 
Thos. J. Barkley and A. B. KHne to Generals Beaver and 
Gallagher. As soon as the introduction was ended Gen. 
Beaver remarked: ''Gentlemen, I am very glad to see you 
here and I appoint you all to act as members of my staff. ' ' 
Several of the clergy received orders immediately to clear 
the space in front of the General and his party so that the 
veterans could' pass muster without being crowded. This 
was no easy task under the circumstances. 

Col. Oursler, of Latrobe, and others deserve great credit 
for securing the presence of so many G. A. R. men. 

Herewith we append some of the letters received by those 
in charge of the celebration. 

LETTERS FROM PUBLIC OFFICIALS, &C. 

Philadelphia, Aug. 2, 1883. 
To the Honorable Committee on Invitation for the Bouquet Celebration : 
Gentlemen : Your kind invitation to participate in the celebration of 
the battle of Bushy Run, in honor of my distinguished countryman, 
Gen. Henry Bouquet, on the 6th instant, has come to hand in time. 
Please accept my sincere thanks for the same and believe me, it would 
afford me great pleasure, to meet you on such an occasion of intense 
gratification to my patriotic feelings. To see the history of another 
of my compatriots, who devoted his life and gallant services to the exist- 
ence and security of this land of freedom in its early stages, — a republi- 
can by birth and spirit, instrumental in the early struggles of this great 
Republic, — drawn from oblivion and placed in its well deserved posi- 
tion before the people, cannot but fill my heart with pride for the hero 
of your celebration and with warmest thanks for the gentlemen who 
have taken in hand this noble task. While I, therefore, deeply regret to 
be prevented, by my arduous duties from accepting your kind and honor- 
ing invitation, I thank you gentlemen, all of you, who have the noblest 
interest, started and brought to a happy issue this timely and creditable 
celebration, from all my heart. I also convey to you my warmest thanks 
from the countrymen in my consular district and especially from the 
members of the Swiss National Festival Society, in this city, whom I 
have made acquainted with your object, and who, in their last meeting, 
by resolution, unanimously passed, have authorized and requested me 
to do so. With sincere hope and conviction, that your festival may be 
a great and complete success, I remain, gentlemen, very respectfully 
yours, R. KORADi, Consul of Switzerland. 

In a personal letter to Rev. Cyrus Cort, Herr Koradi 



Letters from Public Officials ^ &^c. 41 

states that he has forwarded copies of the former's historical 
pamphlet to the Prefect at Rolle, the Chief of Department 
of Public Instruction at Lausanna, to the Federal Chancery 
at Berne and to the Swiss Legation at Washington. 

Executive Mansion, Washington, July 12, 1883. 

My Dear Sir : The President desires me to acknowledge the re- 
ceipt of your kind note of the 7th inst., inviting him to be present at the 
celebration of Bushy Run, on the 6th of August next, and to express 
his regret that engagements covering that date will prevent its accep- 
tance. Thanking you in his behalf for the courtesy of the invitation, I 
am, very truly yours, O. L. Pruden, Sec'y. 

R. Coulter, Esq., Ch'm, etc., Greensburg, Penn'a. 

Washington, July 17, 1883. 

Sir : I much regret that it will not be in my power to accept your 
courteous invitation to be present at the celebration of the 120th an- 
niversary of the battle of Bushy Run on the 6th of Aug. next. Very 
faithfully yours, J. S. Sackville WEST. 

R. Coulter, Esq., Greensburg. 

Executive Department, Commonwealth of Penna. 

Office of the Governor, 
Harrisburg, July 
General R. Coulter, Greensburg, Pa. 

Dear Sir : I am in receipt of your very kind invitation to attend the 
celebration of the 120th anniversary of the battle of Bushy Run, August 
6th, and regret my inability to be present. Accept my thanks and be- 
lieve me your obedient servant, R. E. Pattison. 

State of Ohio, Executive Department, 
Office of the Governor, 
Columbus, July 
R. Coulter, Esq., Greensburg, Pa. 

My Dear Sir : By direction of the Governor, I have the honor to 
acknowledge the receipt of an invitation to him to be present and par- 
ticipate in the celebration of the battle of Bushy Run, to be held on the 
battle-field on Monday, August 6th. The Governor is greatly obliged 
for your kind remembrance of him and regrets that engagements already 
made cover the dates named and will prevent his acceptance. Very 
truly yours, F. D. Mussey, Private Secretary. 

War Department, Adjutant General's Office, \ 
Washington, July 18, 1883. / 
R. Coulter, Esq., Chairman : 

Dear Sir : In reply to your invitation to General Drum to be pres- 
ent at the celebration of the battle of Bushy Run on August 6th, I beg 
to inform you that the General is at present absent on a "tour of inspec- 
tion," and will not return to this city before the date named, otherwise 
I have no doubt he would take pleasure in joining the celebration. 
Very Respectfully, 

Henry Turnbull. 

Letters of regret were also read from ex-Governor Hart- 
ranft ; Mayor King, of Philadelphia \ Hon. W. U. Hensel, 
of Lancaster, and Prof. Samuel Wilson, of Allegheny City. 



APPENDIX 



IMPORTANT ADDENDA, LETTERS, ETC. 

In response to enquiries sent by Counsul Koradi, through 
the Prefect of RoUe, to the custodians of the archives of the 
Canton Vand, at Lausanne, in Switzerland, Rev. C. Cort 
received sonie valuable data from Mr. J. Berney, the Chief 
of Public Instruction for the Canton Vand. 

This came too late for the Bouquet pamphlet, for which it 
was desired, but we will insert the main points here. 

In the Parochial Register of the Reformed Church of 
Rolle, the entry is made March 25, 1735, that Henry Bou- 
quet had been examined, along with others, with a view to 
participate in the Holy Communion. His age is stated to 
be 16 years. This agrees with other data which state that 
Henry Bouquet was born in the year 1719. 

It is further stated in this document of Mr. Berney, that 
Henry Louis Bouquet was the oldest of seven brothers; 
that he entered the service of Holland, in 1736, and after- 
wards passed into the service of Piedmont, where his bril- 
liant career and intelligence attracted the Prince of Orange, 
who invited him to command a company of his guard. 
During the leisure hours of garrison duty, he cultivated the 
sciences and became intimately acquainted with distinguished 
professors in Holland, at the University of Leeyden, &c. 
From this, it appears that our hero had a middle name, 
which he seldom or never used. Louis Bouquet, evidently 
the uncle referred to in the will of Henry Bouquet (see page 
76, of Bouquet pamphlet), became General Quartermaster 
and Lieutenant-Colonel in the Regiment Stuerler, in the 
service of the Netherlands, and renounced his citizenship of 
Rolle, April 14, 1750, and was discharged from his duties 
as a citizen, October 8, 1750, evidently with a view of be- 



44 Th^ Bouquet Celebration — Appendix. 

coming a citizen of Holland, where he had risen to distinc- 
tion. Several members of the Bouquet family served with 
distinction in foreign countries, we are told ; particularly in 
Holland, where, among others, one of his uncles was an 
engineer officer. This may have been Colonel Louis, al- 
ready described. 

The Bouquet family were citizens of Rolle, and one of its 
members belonged to the council of that town or city. 

In the letter, forwarding the document. Consul Koradi 
writes : 

" Just as I thought, when reading your very interesting pamphlet, 
in which you give such a clear and minute report of my countryman, 
that I wondered where you got all these details from ; the report I got 
does not bring anything new. The only point of irriportance is the 
proof by it, that Henry Bouquet really was a native of Rolle, a Swiss from 
the Canton of Vand, and that BouquetVas his correct oirginal name ; that, 
therefore, the suggestions of the Pioneer of Cincinnati, that he was a 
German, and his name Frenchified, from Strauss, into Bouquet, was 
wrong." 

This was the conclusion arrived at, on other grounds, by 
Rev. Cort (see pamphlet, page 5). 

The archives of Vand also state that \ 

" In 1754, the British government confided to him and fellow-coun- 
tryman, Haldimand, of Yoerden (also in the Canton of Vand), the or- 
ganization of a brigade, named the Royal American, into which he 
drew several other fellow-citizens of the Canton of Vand, among whom 
was DuFes, of Monden, and Vullgamott, of Lausanne." 

Subsequent to the publication of the Bouquet pamphlet 
and the Bushy Run Celebration of August 6, 1883, Wm. 
M. Darlington, Esq., of Pittsburg, Pa., informed Rev. C. 
Cort that he had spent a good deal of time in an effort to 
ascertain the exact location of Bouquet's grave, at Pensa- 
cola, many years ago. He had an old drawing of the fort 
and barracks at Pensacola, made in 1772, which would seem 
to locate the grave and monument of Bouquet, if the exact 
position of the old barracks can be determined. 

Mr. Darlington says that one of the principal clerks of 
the British Museum told him that the Canadian government 
paid a thousand pounds sterling, or five thousand dollars, 
for a manuscript copy of the Bouquet-Haldimand papers, 
which were presented to the British Museum by a grandson 
of Haldimand. 



Important Addenda, Letters, &*c. 45 

LETTER OF G. D. SCULL. 

On page 83, of the Bouquet pamphlet, reference is made 
to G. D. Scull, an American resident of Oxford, England, 
who had collated some of the more important Bouquet pa- 
pers for publication, a limited number of which, at ten dol- 
lars a copy, was to be printed at an early date. 

The following letter from Mr. Scull to Rev. Cort, will be 
of interest in several respects. He had previously written 
that Bouquet was deserving of perennial remembrance, and 
he was delighted to learn of the proposed celebration at 
Bushy Run. 

Rugby Lodge, Norham Road, 'J 
Oxford, Aug. 17, 1883. / 

Dear Sir :— I am extremely obliged to you for the copy (jf " Bou- 
quet and his Campaigns," received some days ago. I assure you, I 
have read it with great interest and pleasure. Of a certainty you are 
General Bouquet's quaUfied and well-appointed biographer. What a 
pity that your well directed search for his grave, at Pensacola, ended in 
total failure. 

Lieut. Francis Hutcheson,in 1763, was with Bouquet in his expedition 
against the Ohio Indians, and acted, at times, as his secretary. Bouquet 
invited Hutcheson to go with him to Pensacola, where they arrived, and 
Bouquet was buried eight days after. He was appointed a Major of 
Brigades afterwards. Hutcheson acted as administrator to Bouquet's 
estate, at Pensacola, had a vendue, and brought up North the net bal- 
ance in bills on London and New York — ^3,566.03^ — which was 
handed over to Colonel Haldimand. Among the items of expense are 
amounts paid six soldiers for carrying the corpse to the grave, $3. Left 
with Captam Valoe to finish railing around the General's grave, ^^30, 
and ^11.05 for scantling round ditto. 

Among the things put in an inventory, and which were probably 
handed over to Colonel Haldimand, are :- A gold watch, with a seal, 
coat of arms and compass, a sum of coin, Johannes and j^ do., doub- 
loons, guineas and ]4. do., 2 negro men and i girl, 24 pieces of silver 
plate, I pipe of Madeira, 3 quarter-casks do., 2 casks Rhenish, 2 demi- 
johns claret, cask of bottled beer, scarlet coat, with broad gold lace, 
scarlet, gold-laced frock and breeches, 18 pairs of silk stockings, 9 pairs 
thread do,, 33 shirts, 10 white waist coats, 15 ruffled caps, 11 cotton 
do., 17 stocks, 4 pairs white spadderdashes, 1 plaid night gown, i silk 
night gown, i Huzzar cloak, i silver-mounted sword, i cutlass, i case 
pistols and furniture, 2 boxes containing 5 wigs, etc. 

Major Hutcheson afterwards became Colonel Haldimand's private 
and military secretary. I am quite in the dark if anything has yet been 
done to bring out my Bouquet correspondence in Philadelphia. I am 
grievously disappointed at the result. 

Very truly yours, G. D. Scull. 



46 The Bouquet Celebration — Appendix. 

Looking at matters from our modern standpoint, we may 
smile at the mention of some of the articles in the forego- 
ing list. But Bouquet, like all other men, must be judged 
by his own times, and the customs of the age and country 
in which he lived. An inventory of the personal eff ects of 
George Washington and other Revolutionary patriots would 
not differ materially from the one given above. 

The inventory confirms what we know from other data, 
that Bouquet was a generous-hearted host, a good liver and 
a man of elegant tastes. 

CELEBRATION ITEMS. 

Gen. James A. Beaver and his three sons arrived in Greensburg on 
Saturday evening, and stopped at the Fisher House until Monday morn- 
ing, vi^hen they drove to the Bouquet battle-ground, where the General 
took part in the celebration. He was on his way to Conneaut Lake, 
where his brigade will go into encampment at the close of the week. 

Andrew Byerly, of Sharpsville, Mercer county, a great grandson of 
Andrew Byerly, of Bushy Run fame, arrived in Greensburg on Satur- 
day, on his way to Bushy Run, and was the guest of Ex- County Treas- 
urer James Gregg. — Prof. Andrew Byerly, of Millersville Normal 
School, an establishment of seven or eight hundred students, is also a 
great grandson. 

Mrs. Rev. Cyrus Cort, two sons — Paul and Ambrose — and cousin, 
reached this place at noon on Saturday, from Greencastle, in a carriage 
drawn by one horse. They came by way of Forts iiedford and Ligo- 
nier — the same road taken by Col. Bouquet and his army when on his 
way to relieve Fort Pitt. They were three days en route, the distance 
traveled being one hundred and twenty-five miles. They spent one 
night at Ligonier, the site of the fort by that name, where Andrew By- 
erly, the great-great-great-grandfather of Mrs. Cort's sons, was cooped 
up by Pontiac's confederates, after making a narrow escape from Bushy 
Run, where Byerly kept a relay station for express riders midway be- 
tween Forts Pitts and Ligonier. Mrs. Cort joined her husband at this 
place, who arrived here by rail on Thursday morning last, accompanied 
by his four-year-old son, Ralph Bouquet, to help perfect arrangements 
for the celebration. 

A bayonet used by the Royal Infantry, and found on the Bushy Run 
battle-field by C. Gongaware in i88i, and presented to Rev. Cyrus 
Cort, of Greencastle, was on exhibition. It is in a good state of preserva- 
tion. The blade part is sixteen inches long and bears the appearance 
of having been a very formidable instrument of war. 

OLD BOB, THE WAR HORSE. 

The celebrated war horse upon which Col. George Covode was shot 
and killed, is here. He is owned by W. H. Covode, Esq., of Ligo- 
nier. He is now 32 years old, and was through the following engage- 



Monument Collections. 47 

ments : Gaines Mill, Charles City Cross Roads, Hedgeville, Antietam, 
Markham Station, Kelly's Ford, Middleburg, Gettysburg, Upperville, 
Shepherdstown, TrevilUan Station, Todd's Tavern, Sulphur Springs, 
Deep Bottom, St. Mary's Church, Ream's Station, Stony Creek, &c. 
Col. Covode rode Bob around Richmond twice, during which he was 
shot in the neck, the only wound the horse received. 

That intrepid son of Mars, Colonel Rogers, divided the Indian honors 
with Guito, the Seneca youth. The valiant Colonel was gotten up as a 
great brave in a fearful and wonderful costume, with rings, feathers and 
a great battle-axe as ornaments. To attempt a description of his outfit 
would be to essay to " paint the lily." It is enough to say that his 
make-up was purely and typically Rogerian and that he was the ob- 
served of all observers. 

Captain Samuel Bell, of South Huntingdon township, with a com- 
pany of 100 uniformed men on horseback. 

A delegation of five arrived from Irwin on bicycles. 

J. V. Stephenson, Adison Bamhart, Harry Huffman, Eli Beck, 
Joseph Guffey and B. J. Johnston arrived at 9 o'clock on bicycles. 

Several amusing incidents occurred while the surveying party were 
engaged in marking the battle-field. 

John Layton (colored) assisted at the work, and his mind was evi- 
dently quite wrought up by hearing details of the fight. He gave vent to 
his feelings by such exclamations as these : " I tell you what, didn't 
William Penn and his soldiers have a hard time of it here ? What terri- 
ble sufferings our ancestors had to go through," &c. 

After hearing the story of Kuykyuskung, (pages 40-42 of Bouquet 
pamphlet), some of the boys concluded to have a little fun and do some 
marking on their own account. Accordidgly they marked a board as 
follows, and nailed it to a large oak tree by the roadside, and near the 
scene of Bouquet's final strategic movement so disastrous to the savages : 
" Here one bloody injun, Kookyoosti, was kilt." A great crowd sur- 
rounded that tree on Celebration Day, and many pieces of its bark were 
taken away as relics. 

The large Swiss national flag with its red field and white cross in the 
centre, presented a fine appearance, as did also the smaller one with its 
gilt fringing. 

MONUMENT COLLECTIONS. 

A number of gentlemen were furnished with subscription 
lists to get contributions for the monument proposed to be 
erected to Col. Bouquet and his army on the battle-field. But it 
seems very little was done for this laudable object, except by 
some of the citizens of Irwin and Stewartsville and vicinity, 
who, besides raising $56 to help defray expenses of the celebra- 
tion, also gave forty dollars ($40) toward the monument 
fund. This ;^4o with a goodly part of the ^56, were given 
by descendants of Andrew Byerly, of Bushy Run. If 



4S The Bouquet Celebralion — Appendix. 

Greensburg, Penn., Harrison City, Manor, and other places 
would do as well in proportion, a granite memorial column 
would soon crown the summit of the battle-field, which 
would permanently identify the place and perpetuate the 
memory of the decisive conflict and the gallant heroes 
through all coming time. 

Several hundred dollars more are needed for this monu- 
ment fund, which we trust the public-spirited citizens of 
Western Pennsylvania will contribute at an early date. A 
grand work has already been accomplished by the celebra- 
tion of August 6, 1883, and the various publications rela- 
ting to Bouquet which it called forth. But without the 
monument the projectors and advocates and actors in that 
commemoration feel that the main object of their endeavors 
remains to be realized. This fund is in charge of General 
Coulter, Amos B. Kline and James Gregg, (Treasurer), of 
Greensburg, to whom contributions ma)' be safely entrusted. 
Furnish them ^300 more, and the monument will be put up, 
and a grand dedication service will bring to a fitting con- 
clusion the praiseworthy eff"orts to honor the memory of 
Henry Bouquet and the 1763 Army of Deliverance. One 
way of helping the cause is to circulate the pamphlet relating 
to Bouquet, his campaigns and the celebration of the Bushy 
Run victory. As the Freiheif s Freund, of Pittsburg, stated 
in one of its issues, these pamphlets '' ought to be put into 
the hands of every school boy and girl in Pennsylvania." 
As a limited number of copies have been printed and the 
work not stereotyped, the time will probably soon come 
when they will be as rare and expensive as Bouquet's origi- 
nal narrative, a copy of which recently brought upwards of 
fifty dollars. And yet without them no Pennsylvania 
library can be considered complete. Their preparation has 
been a labor of love on the part of him who has borne the 
chief burden of toil and expense from a sense of gratitude to 
the noble Swiss hero who rescued his ancestors from the toma-. 
hawk and scalping-knife of the merciless savages. But 
thousands of others in our Keystone Commonwealth, yea, 
all over this great Republic, are also greatly indebted to 
Henry Bouquet, and should esteem it a duty and privilege to 
help perpetuate the memory of his noble character and his 
heroic deeds. 



Guyasutha. 49 

GUYASUTHA. 

The reputed leader of the savages at Bushy Run battle 
and the siege of Fort Pitt, was Guyasutha, the chief of a 
band ot Seneca Indians located in Ohio, who, along with the 
Mingoes, belonged to the loquois or famous Six Nations, from 
Central and Western New York. His name is spelled in half a 
dozen different ways. As a young brave he went with Wash- 
ington from Logstown to LaBoeufin 1754. He was a leading 
character in the conference with Gen. Bradstreet when that 
conceited officer was hoodwinked by the wily savages near 
Lake Erie in 1764. A few weeks later he had to deal with 
a different style of man in his conference with Col. Bouquet 
on the Muskingum. His eloquent and politic speech on 
that occasion is given in the Bouquet pamphlet, page 68. 
^ In April and May, 1768, he was leading actor at a confer- 
ence at Fort Pitt. When Washington descended the Ohio 
in 1770 Guyasutha visited him and was recognized as one 
of his companions in 1754. 

In 1775, two days after the Westmoreland patriots had 
promulgated their Declaration of Indpendence, on May 16, 
at Hannastown and Fort Pitt, Guyasutha, who had just re- 
turned from Niagara, held a conference at Fort Pitt with 
- Majors Trent and Ward and Captain Neville. Capt. Pipe, 
a Delaware chief, and Shade, a Shawnese chief, and several 
other Shawnese, took part. Guyasutha announced that the 
Six Nations and their allies in Ohio would remain neutral 
during the impending war between the British and the Amer- 
ican Colonists. He said : " Brothers, we will not suffer 
either English or Americans to pass through our country. 
Should either attempt it we will forewarn them three times, 
and should they persist they must abide the consequences. 
I am appointed by the Six Nations to take care of this 
country, that is, of the Indians on the other side of the 
. Ohio, and I desire that you will not think of an expedition 
against Detroit, for, to repeat, we will not suffer an army 
to pass through our country." 

In 1782, July 13, Guyasutha led the attack on Hannas- 
town. He seems to have been the greatest leader of Pon- 
tiac's Eastern confederates, but had his forces shattered at 
Bushy Run by Bouquet, after the best contested battle ever 



50 The Bouquet Celebration — Appendix. 

fought by the red savages on American soil. In view of his 
prominence, the war is sometimes called ''Guyasutha's 
War," as well as '' Pontiac's War." Finally, he died near 
Pittsburg, at an advanced age, leaving his name to the 
beautiful plain on the Allegheny river, where his remains 
now rest. 

Neville B. Craig gives most of the foregoing facts in 
his History of Pittsburg (pages 136-9), and was personally 
acquainted with Guyasutha, when he tarried superfluous on 
the stage a striking emblem of the decayed condition of the 
Six Nations, as in the prime of life he had been a fit repre- 
sentative of their power and glory. Once the Iroquois car- 
ried dismay to all the savage tribes between the Atlantic and 
the Father of Waters, and between the Gulf of Mexico and 
the great Lakes of the North. Yea, to French and English 
alike, in Canada and the United States. They were the 
recognized lords of the savage wilderness, and exacted 
tribute from the powerful Catawbas and Cherokees in the 
distant South, who traveled along the war-path through the 
wilds of Westmoreland, from year to year, with tokens of 
obeisance and servitude to the great Council House at 
Onondaga. And thus, like the old Romans, their power 
and glory, founded on rapine, has departed, in spite of all 
their superior courage, energy and governmental genius. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS. 

A shade of sadness comes over us as we bring this memo- 
rial volume to a close. A number of public-spirited citi- 
zens, who took part in the celebration, and who were most 
highly gratified and warmest m their congratulations over 
its success, have passed away since that memorable sixth of 
August, 1883. Hon. Joseph H. Kuhns, who seemed to re- 
new his youth in his efforts to promote the commemoration ; 
General Thomas F. Gallagher, the stalwart hero of Gaines' 
Mills and South Mountain ; Dr. Samuel Wilson, who was 
stricken down with fatal disease on the eve of the celebra- 
tion, in which he fondly hoped to take part ; ex-Senator 
Cowan and others, distinguished in forum and field, have 
passed across the river. This is a solemn reminder that we, 
who remain, ''should be up and doing," to finish the 
work so grandly begun. 



MEMORIAL 



ENOCH BEOWN 



AND 



ELEVEN SCHOLARS. 

Who Were Massacred in Antrim Township, Pranklin 

County, Pa., by the Indians, During the 

Pontiao War, July 26, 1764, 

CONTAINING 



ADDRESSES of GEORGE W. ZIEGLER, Esq., REV. CYRUS CORT, Hon. 
PETER A. WITMER, Rev. F. A. WOODS and Dr. WM. H. EGLE, 
AND POEM OF JOHN M. COOPER, Esq., at the DEDICA- 
TION OF THE ENOCH BROWN PARK and MONU- 
MENTS, THREE MILES NORTH of GREEN- 
CASTLE, PA., AUGUST 4, 1885, 
With CENTENNIAL SERMONS, APPENDIX, &c. 



Edited by REV. CYRUS CORT, in behalf of the 
Enoch Brown Monument Committee, 



LANCASTER, PA. 
Steinman & Hensel, Printers, 

1886. 



Entered According to Act of Congress, in the 

Year of our Lord 1886, by 

CYRUS CORT, 

In . the Office of the Librarian of Congress, 

at Washington. 

All Rights Reserved. 



DEDICATION. 



"J^O the Teachers and Scholars of all the Schools, secular 
jand religiotis, in Franklin County, Pa., who aided by 
their contributions and their labors in securing the Enoch 
Bro7vn Park and Monuments; also, to the Christian peo- 
ple aftd pniblic- spirited citizens of the county, and of other 
counties, who helped along the good cause with their gener- 
ous gifts, this volume is affectionately dedicated. " The 
righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance T 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Introductory Sketch, . .- i 

The Dedication Ceremonies : 

Unveiling and Dedication, ; 7 

Speech of George W. Ziegler, Esq., 15 

Presentation Speech of Rev. Cyrus Cort, 18 

Address of Peter A. Witmer, Esq., 30 

Address of Rev. F. M. Woods, 39 

Poem of John M Cooper, 46 

Address of Dr. Wm. H. Egle, 49 

Appendix : 

The Christian Name of Schoolmaster Brown, 55 

Enoch Brown Poetry, 5^ 

The Quaker Poet, . 57 

Hon. Horatio Seymour on the Monument, 58 

Report of the Treasurer of the Enoch Brown Monument 

Fund, January 4, 1886, 59 

Incorporation, 62 

The Archie McCuUough Spring, 64 

Mother Terrapin, 65 

The County Superintendent's Absence, 66 

A Word of Explanation, 68 

Action of Enoch Brown Memorial Committee, 70 

Providential Escapes from the Massacre, 71 

Centennial Memorial Sermons : 

Sermon of Rev. Cyrus Cort, 74 

Centennial Sermon of Rev. J. Hassler, 92 

Sermon of Rev. J. W. Knappenberger, A. M., 103 




^^^^^f^^mmm^s^mmmm^i^jm^ ^ y . 



FROM Photo by Collins, of GREENCASTLt. Pa 



MONUMENT ON THE SITE OF ENOCH BROWN SCHOOL HOUSE. 



Enoch Brown Memorial. 



INTRODUCTORY SKETCH. 



A FEW years after the French and Indian Wars came the 
Pontiac War of 1763-4, when the great chieftain of 
the Ottawas marshaled the tribes between the great lakes 
and the Alleghenies into hostile camps against the English 
and their colonial subjects. His avowed purpose was to 
drive the red coats and pale faces into the sea. No less 
than ten forts between Detroit and Fort Pitt were captured, 
and most of their garrisons massacred. Detroit, Fort Pitt 
and Ligonier were closely besieged for months by the savages. 
Col. Henry Bouquet with a force of about five hundred 
men, mostly Scotch highlanders, broke the eastern wing of 
Pontiac's conspiracy by defeating his confederates under 
Guyasutha, &c. , after a desperate two days battle at Edge 
Hill or Bushy Run, Aug. 5 and 6, 1763. The gallant com- 
mander begged for a few hundred more troops with which 
to penetrate to the haunts of the Indians in central Ohio 
and thus bring the war to a decisive close. But the Quaker 
provincial authorities disregarded his appeals for the much 
needed reinforcements. As a consequence, prowling bands 
of savages made frequent raids, into the settlements, killing 
and scalping the pioneer settlers in Pennsylvania, Maryland 
and Virginia regardless of age, sex or condition. In one 
of these forays into the Cumberland Valley on the twenty- 
sixth day of July, 1 764, there was perpetrated, what Park- 
man, the historian of Colonial times, pronounces *'an out- 

A 



2 Enoch Brown Memorial, 

rage unmatched in fiendish atrocity through all the annals 
of the war. ' ' 

This was the cold-blooded massacre of Enoch Brown, a 
worthy Christian school-master, and eleven scholars, at a 
little log school-house in Antrim township, three miles north 
of where Green castle now stands. 

Eight years before to the very day (July 26, 1756,) John 
McCullough, eight years old, and his little brother had been 
carried away captive by five Delaware Indians and a French- 
man, from their home, a few miles southwest of the school 
house, and at this time John was living as an adopted son, 
among the Delaware Indians on the banks of the Musk- 
ingum. In his narrative, as published in Border Life, &c. , 
it is stated that the massacre of the school-master and 
scholars was perpetrated by three young warriors from that 
locality, who brought the scalps of master and scholars back 
as bloody trophies of their trip into the settlements. Neep- 
paugh-weese. Night Walker, an old chief or half king, and 
other old Indians denounced them for killing so many chil- 
dren and called them cowards, the greatest affront that 
could be offered them. 

The original MSS. of the McCullough narrative, now in 
the possession of John McCullough, a grandson of the cap- 
tive lad, contains no reference to the massacre, but the 
family are confident that their ancestor furnished the ac- 
count as given in Border Life, &c. 

Others have claimed that the massacre was perpetrated by 
a squad of Seneca Indians from western New York. Rich- 
ard Bard in his narrative states that his father was at work 
near the place of massacre on the 26th of July, 1764, and 
owing to the strange movements of his dog he concluded 
that Indians were skulking in the thicket near by. He re- 
treated to the house and in about an hour saw a party com- 
manded by Capt. Potter (afterwards Gen. Potter of the 
Revolution) who were in pursuit of a party of Indians, who 
had on that morning murdered a school-master named 
Brown with ten small children, and had scalped and left for 
dead one by the name of Archibald McCullough, who re- 
covered. * * According to the story of the boy, two old 
Indians and a young Indian rushed up to the door soon after 



Introductory Sketch. 3 

the opening of the morning session. The master, surmising 
their object, prayed them only to take his Hfe and spare the 
children, but all were brutally knocked in the head with an 
Indian maul and scalped. Some of the traditions repre- 
sent the Indians as shooting the master down when they 
approached the door, and that on his knees he begged them 
to spare the lives of the little ones. 

Parkman, in his ^' Conspiracy of Pontiac," Vol. 2, says: 
"■ In the centre lay the master, scalped and lifeless, with a 
Bible clasped in his hand ; while around the room were 
strewn the bodies of his pupils, miserably mangled, though 
one of them still retained a spark of life. The deed was 
committed by three or four warriors from an Indian village 
near the Ohio." 

The savage fiends made good their escape, and the horror- 
stricken settlers buried the master and ten scholars in a 
large box, placed alternately head and feet in opposite direc- 
tions in a common grave a few rods from the scene of 
slaughter. Seventy-nine years afterwards (Aug. 4. 1843) 
the traditional account of the burial was verified by excava- 
tions made by about twenty citizens of Antrim township, in- 
cluding Geo. W. Ziegler, Esq., Dr. Jas. K. Davison and Gen. 
David Detrich who still remain with us in a hale old age. 
Christian Koser, the owner of the land, planted four locust 
trees at the corners of the grave ; two of these grew for thirty 
odd years, when, strange to tell, they were cut down for 
posts. There was danger that the sacred spot would pass 
into oblivion. Col. B. F. Winger, Gen. David Detrich 
and Rev. Cyrus Cort visited the location in the spring of 
1883, (April 11), and a month later. May 14, laid the 
matter before a meeting of the citizens of Greencastle, at 
which Geo. W. Ziegler, Esq., presided. Steps were taken 
looking to the purchase of the land and the erection of a 
monument, but nothing definite was done until the attention 
of the Franklin County Centennial Convention of April 
22, 1884, was called to the subject. 

This convention, composed of representative men from all 
parts of the county, appointed a committee, consisting of 
Rev. Cyrus Cort, Wm. G. Davison, Col. G. B. Wiestling, 



4 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

Dr. A. H. Strickler and Benj. Chambers, to devise plans for 
raising funds to erect a monument, &c. 

At the afternoon session of the Convention the committee 
reported as follows : 

Your committee appointed to prepare a proper plan for securing per- 
manent results from the Centennial Celebration in the shape of a Monu- 
ment to the memory of Schoolmaster Enoch Brown and the ten school 
children massacred by merciless savages, July 26th 1764, respectfully re- 
port the following for the consideration of this Convention : 

Resolved, That the sum of at least two thousand dollars be raised for 
the purpose of securing a suitable amount of land on the farm of Capt. 
Jacob Diehl, in Antrim township, including the spot where Schoolmas- 
ter Brown and his ten children were massacred by the Indians, July 
26th, 1764, and where they are now buried; and of enclosing the same 
with a suitable fence and likewise of erecting an appropriate monument 
to their memory and keeping the same in permanent repair. 

Resolved, That the aforesaid fund shall be raised in the name of the 
teachers and scholars of all the schools in the county, including com- 
mon schools, select schools and Sunday schools. 

Resolved, That all the teachers and scholars of the schools aforesaid 
be earnestly requested to contribute at least one dime each toward the 
fund on or before Sept. 9, 1884, and the names of all teachers and 
scholars so contributing or collecting at least one dime shall be record- 
ed in a suitable book to be preserved in the archives of the Historical 
Society of Franklin County. 

Resolved, That the committee of the respective townships be direct- 
ed to take immediate steps to have the foregoing school collections 
taken up, either by the teachers at present or lately in charge of the 
schools, or by some suitable person in each school district. 

Resolved, That in aid of this fund we recommend that a collection 
be taken at all the memorial religious services held on the Sunday pre- 
ceding the Centennial Anniversary, viz : September 7th, 1884. 

Resolved, That in further aid of this fund we recommend that the 
Executive Centennial Committee be directed to request the various rail- 
roads in the county to contribute a generous rebate on all excursion 
tickets issued on account of the Centennial Celebration. 

Resolved, That a committee of five be appointed to receive the funds 
and carry into effect the action proposed in the foregoing resolution in 
regard to the purchase of land, erection of monument, &c. 

Resolved, That the above committee be directed to request the Court 
of Franklin County, or other competent authority, to appoint three trus- 
tees to invest not less than five hundred dollars of the funds in securi- 
ties approved by the court, the annual proceeds to be devoted to keep- 
ing the grounds, monument and fences in good condition and repair. 



Introductory Sketch. 5 

Resolved^ That the newspapers of the county be earnestly requested 
to urge the importance of this memorial feature of the Centennial upon 
the attention of the people of Franklin county. 

The report was unanimously adopted by the Convention, 
and on the motion of Col. Wiestling, the committee called 
for in the seventh resolution was appointed as follows : Rev. 
Cyrus Cort, (chairman) ; Dr. A. H. Strickler (treasurer) ; 
Hon. D. W. Rowe, Capt. R. J. Boyd and Col. W. D. 
Dixon. 

On the following day, April 23d, the committee contracted 
with Capt. Diehl, through Col. B. F. Winger, for the en- 
closed tract or field which contains the site of the school 
house, the grave of Enoch Brown, and scholars, together 
with the spring adjacent. 

April 29th, the land was surveyed under the supervision 
of Col. Winger, along with Rev. Cort, Dr. Strickler and 
Col. Dixon of the committee. Capt. Diehl obligated him- 
self in writing to give a deed for the land as soon as the 
surveyor had completed his plot and estimates. The com- 
mittee pay at the rate of twenty-five dollars per acre. 

The committee bought more land than was at first con- 
templated, for the reason that it was cheaper to purchase 
the entire field of a fraction less than twenty acres at ^^25 
per acre, than to buy four or five acres in the heart of the 
field for ^30 per acre, fence it in with a strong and durable 
fence and give bonds to keep the same in good repair for 
all time to come, which was the alternative presented by 
the owner of the tract. 

The surplus land can be sold and the cost of outside 
fencing saved, together with the expense and liability of a 
bond binding through all time and necessitating an invest- 
ment as large as the cost of the entire field. A public road 
has been laid out along the north side of the Enoch Brown 
Park as the tract is now called. It required a great deal of 
work to reclaim the historic spring and clear off the ground 
between it and the grave. For several weeks during the 
hottest weather the chairman of the committee, assisted by 
other public spirited citizens, ''worked with head, heart, 
hand and horse ' ' to accomplish this praiseworthy undertak- 



6 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

ing, as the poet John M. Cooper, Esq., expressed it in his 
report of the dedication services in the Carlisle Volunteer. 
The contract for erecting the monuments was awarded to 
Mr. W. N. Meredith, of Mercersburg, for the sum of ;^5oo, 
the committee furnishing the limestone foundations. Hun- 
dreds have visited the Park since dedication day, and have 
uniformly expressed their gratification with the monuments, 
iron fences and improvements made by the committee with 
the funds at their command. Other items of historic inter- 
est are omitted here because they appear in the addresses. 




MONUMENT OVER THE COMMON GRAVE OF ENOCH BROWN AND TEN SCHOLARS. 



THE DEDICATION CEREMONIES. 



THE following account of the dedication ceremonies, 
organization, speeches, &c., we cull in the main from 
the Greencastle Press of August 6, 1885 : 

UNVEILING AND DEDICATION. 

August 4, 1885, was indeed the red letter day for Mother 
Antrim. Never before in her history was there such an 
outpouring of her beauty and chivalry to honor and grace a 
public occasion as that which congregated at Enoch Brown 
Park on Dedication Day. The two previous days had been 
stormy and foreboding. The long wished for rain had 
deluged the earth in torrents and many feared that the 
weather would be unfavorable for the ceremonies. But there 
never dawned a lovelier day for the occasion than last Tues- 
day. At an early hour a stream of visitors began to pour 
out over the hills to the Park until about 5,000 people had 
assembled on the historic field. The large monument on 
the site of the school house, which can be seen from afar, 
first attracted attention, and around it a large con- 
course of people were soon assembled. Then the beati- 
ful monument of smaller proportions over the common 
grave of Schoolmaster Enoch Brown and ten scholars was 
next visited, and around it many lingered with deep and 
melancholy interest. Then the historic spring at the foot 
of the hill, a few yards off, drew the multitude, not only 
to gratify curiosity, but to slake their thirst, and thousands 
there partook of nature's cooling beverage, as did the 
scholars of Enoch Brown one hundred and twenty-one years 
ago. It was equal to the large demands, although one 
hundred and fifty gallons had been dipped out the previous 
evening after dusk. 



8 Enoch Brown Memorial 

Shortly after ii o'clock Rev. Cyrus Cort arrived with 
Poet Cooper and Historian Egle and daughter in his car- 
riage, the morning train on which they came from Harris- 
burg having been delayed about half an hour. 

The meeting was called to order by Col. B. F. Winger, 
Chief Marshal. Mounting the base of the monument the 
Rev. Cort made a few preliminary remarks . and then four 
little girls and nine boys, viz.. Rose Winger, Libbie Sea- 
crest, Sally Whitmore and Carrie Hawbecker, Paul Cort, 
Paul Sunners, Ambrose Cort, Ambrose Walck, Harry Fuss, 
Elmer Pentz, George Pentz, George Gorden and Willie 
Meredith, pulled the cords, the mantle of red, white and 
blue fell and the monument stood forth a thing of beauty 
and strength, the delight of all beholders. It is indeed a 
massive affair. On the top of four feet of solid masonry 
underneath the ground are nearly four feet of dressed lime- 
stone of immense proportions from Hawbecker' s Williamson 
quarry. On the top of this limestone foundation, which is 
five feet square, is placed the granite base of the monument, 
four feet square and seventeen inches high, and weighing 
4,600 pounds. Next comes the polished die or sub-base, 
three feet square and two feet high, on the four sides of 
which are engraved the inscriptions. On the top of this stands 
the shaft of the monument, two feet square at the base, ten 
feet high and tapering gracefully to a pyramidal apex. The 
shaft weighs 4,100 pounds. Enclosing the monument is a 
very substantial iron fence, fifteen feet square. The follow- 
ing are the inscriptions : 

On the East side : 



Sacred to the Memory of School- master Enoch ! 
Brown and Eleven Scholars, viz: Ruth Hart, 
Ruth Hale, Eben Taylor, George Dunstan, Ar- 
chie McCULLOUGH, AND SiX OTHERS, (NaMES UN 
known) WHO WERE MASSACRED AND SCALPED BY 

Indians on this Spot, July 26, 1764, During the 
Pontiac War. 



The Dedication Ceremonies. 
On the North side : 



Erected by Direction of the Franklin Coun- 
ty Centennial Convention of April 22, 1884, in 
THE Name of the Teachers and Scholars of All 
THE Schools in the County, Including Common 
Schools, Select Schools and Sunday Schools. 
For a Full List of Contributors see Archives 
of Franklin County Historical Society or Re- 
corder's Office. 



West side inscription, next to grave 



The Remains of Enoch Brown and Ten Schol- 
ars (Archie McCullough Survived the Scalp- 
ing) Lie Buried in a Common Grave, South 62^4^ 
Degrees, West 141^ Rods from this Monument. 
They Fell as Pioneer Martyrs in the Cause of 
Education and Christian Civilization. 



On the South side : 



The ground is holy where they fell, 

And where their mingled ashes lie, 
Ye Christian people mark it well 

With granite column strong and high ; 
And cherish well forevermore 

The storied wealth of early years, 
The sacred legacies of yore, 

The toils and trials of pioneers. 



The latter are the concluding stanzas of a poem pubhshed 
last Spring in the town papers and in the Guardian, a 
monthly magazine issued in Philadelphia. 

The small monument was unveiled at the grave by Rev. 
Cort after a few preliminary remarks. It is a very chaste 

A* 



lo Enoch Brown Memorial. 

and pretty structure, composed, like the larger monument, of 
Concord granite. It is about seven feet high and two feet 
square at the base. On the side facing the grave is this 
inscription, '' The grave of Schoolmaster Enoch Brown and 
Ten Scholars, massacred by the Indians July 26, 1764." 
Around it is also a solid iron fence ten feet square. A 
heavy stone wall has been erected near the south end of the 
grave and considerable filling has been done. The Mer- 
cersburg band played a dirge at the large monument and 
the Greencastle and Shady Grove bands at the smaller 
when the unveiling took place. The assemblage then re- 
paired to the stand erected in the grove belonging to the 
Park, where the remaining ceremonies were conducted ac- 
cording to the published programme. 

George W. Ziegler, Esq., was chosen President for the 
day and made a short address heartily approving the 
cause which had brought the people together and com- 
mending the Monument Committee for its faithful and 
energetic labors. Rev. J. D. Hunter then offered a very 
appropriate prayer. The Reformed church choir, under 
the lead of Prof. Collins assisted by a few amateurs, sang 
''America," ''My Country, 'tis of Thee," and afterwards 
the "The Infant Martyrs," a hymn composed by Dr. Henry 
Harbaugh on the martyred babes of Bethlehem who were 
slain by King Herod. The organization was completed by 
the election of the vice-presidents and secretaries, viz. : 

Vice Presidents, Rev. J. Spangler Kiefer, Hagerstown, 
Md.; General David Detrich, Dr. James K. Davidson, Cap- 
tain Jacob Deihl, Antrim ; Jacob Hoke, Judge Kimmel, Rev. 
Herbert, Chambersburg ; Jacob B. Brumbaugh, Peters; 
Simon Lecron, D. C. Shank, George J. Balsley, D. O. 
Nicodemus, Washington ; Joseph Winger, Montgomery ; 
Dr. Frick, Quincy; Rev. Kappenberger, John Hoch, Mer- 
cersburg ; Rev. Bahner, Waynesboro ; Rev. Riddle, Fairfax, 
Va.; Andrew K. Kissecker, Tiffin, Ohio. Secretaries, W. 
G. Davison, W. C. Kreps, Greencastle ; Bruce Laudebaugh, 
G. W. Atherton, Mercersburg ; William A. Ried, Antrim ; 
A. N. Pomeroy, Chambersburg. 

Rev. Cyrus Cort, chairman of the Monument Committee, 
then made the presentation speech, which was well received 



The Dedication Ceremonies. 1 1 

and warmly applauded by the audience. The speaker was 
heartily congratulated from all sides at the close. 

PIC-NIC DINNER. 

At this point a recess of an hour was taken to partake of 
a pic-nic dinner in the woods. It was an interesting and 
picturesque sight to see families and groups of families 
enjoying the sumptuous meals which they spread upon the 
leaves and grass or upon improvised tables throughout the 
beautiful grove. The speakers, Witmer, Woods (and lady), 
Egle (and daughter), and poet Cooper, together with some 
of the clergy, were entertained at one table near the stand 
by President Ziegler, Marshal Winger and Chairman Cort 
and their families, and seemed to greatly enjoy their dinner 
and the surroundings. A balmy breeze floated among the 
trees, and nature and Providence combined to make the 
scene one long to be remembered, adding a peculiar zest to 
the spirit of hospitality and good will that pervaded the 
occasion. 

AFTERNOON SESSION. 

After dinner the exercises at the stand were resumed. 
Rev. J. W. Knappenberger, of Mercersburg, made a short 
and very appropriate prayer. Peter A. Witmer, Esq., of 
Hagerstown, Superintendent of Public Schools of Washing- 
ton county, Md., made an eloquent and able address, con- 
veying the cordial greetings of a sister State and a neigh- 
boring county, endorsing heartily the movement. He 
said: ''Enoch Brown was a nobler hero than the blood- 
stained warriors or thousands of others who were so often 
honored in this way. The school house was the symbol of 
our civilization and that brave and self-sacrificing man, who 
was ready to yield his life as a sacrifice for his scholars, was 
a pioneer and a martyr in a blessed cause. He was worthy 
the high honors shown him to-day." Rev. F. M. Woods, 
of Martinsburg, W. Va. , then delivered an excellent speech 
in fine style. He paid a glowing tribute to the sterling 
Scotch-Irish pioneer settlers, who came to this new world 
that they might have freedom to worship God. They were 
ready to leave kindred and country and sunder the dearest 



12 Enoch Brown Memorial, 

earthly ties for conscience sake. They asked not "Will it 
pay?" "Will it be popular?" but "Is it right?" and, fear- 
ing God, they had no fear of man. What added peculiar 
interest to Rev. Mr. Wood's remarks is the fact that he is 
married to a daughter of Rev. D. X. Junkin, who is a de- 
scendant of Eleanor Cochrane. His wife sat immediately 
behind him on the platform, and seemed to enjoy the occa- 
sion beyond all others present, which is saying a great deal. 

Next came the poem, by John M. Cooper, Esq., the 
gifted bard of Antrim. Like all other productions from 
Mr. Cooper's pen, it was beautiful and classic. It threw a 
halo of poetic fancy around the memory of the martyred 
schoolmaster and scholars. 

Finally Dr. Wm. H. Egle, of Harrisburg, Pa., delivered 
in an effective manner the historial address of the occasion 
on "Pontiac and Bouquet," with especial reference to the 
part taken by Provincial troops in the campaign of 1 763—4. 
He contrasted these distinguished leaders of the red and 
white races as the representatives of savagery and civiliza- 
tion, and sketched graphically the leading events in the 
campaigns of 1763-4. He paid a glowing tribute to the 
memory of Enoch Brown (he called him Enoch all the 
time), the brave, true-hearted schoolmaster, who fell with 
his scholars before the brutality of incarnate fiends. The 
Doctor evidently has no special love for the Indian charac- 
ter and believes that the uncivilized red man illustrates fully 
the doctrine of total depravity. He paid a very handsome 
compliment to Rev. C. Cort, not only for his persevering 
and successful efforts in behalf of the Enoch Brown Monu- 
ment, but as the author of an "elegant work" on Bouquet 
and his campaign of 1 763-4. 

At the close Col. Winger moved a vote of thanks to the 
speakers and poet, and that they be requested to furnish 
copies of their speeches and poem to the Enoch Brown 
Monument Committee for publication. A vote of thanks 
was also returned to the five bands present for their gratuitous 
services, viz : The bands of Mercersburg, Clay Hill, Shady 
Grove, New Franklin and Greencastle. 

The benediction was finally pronounced by Rev. John R. 
Agnew, a grandson of Mary Ramsey, one of the scholars 



The Dedication Ceremonies. 13 

of the Enoch Brown school, who Providentially escaped 
the massacre. 

Col. Wiestling was to have made the reception speech, 
but was unable to be present. His substitute failing to 
appear, the following letter was read : 

Mont Alto, July 29, 1885. 
Rev. Cyrus Cort^ Chairman Enoch Brown Monument Committee : 

My Dear Sir : For several weeks I have had but little respite from 
severe suffering from acute rheumatism following in the wake of a 
sprained knee. This has so disabled me that business matters have 
accumulated on my hands to such an extent as to render it exceedingly 
improbable that I can ever attend the unveiling ceremonies on August 4. 

Although (as I advised you) I feared this contingency, yet I feel 
sadly disappointed, and deeply regret my inability to celebrate with you 
what I consider an important event. I know it will be interesting ; I 
know you will be happy, because the consciousness of having faithfully 
fulfilled the trust committed to you by the people of Franklin County 
through their representatives in convention, cannot but make you con- 
gratulate each other as I heartily do you all. Yes, I congratulate the 
citizens of our county on the successful consummation of the crowning 
feature in the programme of the Centennial celebration, so happily 
woven into history by the untiring and effective labors of your com- 
mittee. The convention made no mistake in determining upon the 
crowning memorial, it did not eir in providing the way to secure means 
for its accomplishment, and it was equally fortunate in selecting a com- 
mittee of ability, industry and unswerving integrity to its commission, a 
committee, the chairmanship of which you have a right to be proud. 
As compensation for my absence I enclose my check for twenty dollars 
additional contribution to the Monument fund; but how I am to be 
compensated for the loss of my anticipated pleasure in being with you, 
I know not. Very truly yours, 

Geo. B. Wiestling. 

The following letter was also read from Rev. Prof. Jos. 
H. Dubbs, D. D., Professor of History, &c., in Franklin 
and Marshall College : 

Rev. C. Cort: 

Mr Dear Sir : I regret that it will not be in my power to be present 
at the dedication of the Enoch Brown Monument. It is in my opinion 
an occasion of profound interest, and I hope it may command the gen- 
eral respect which is manifestly deserves. We have in this country but 
imperfectly learned the lesson that in honoring our ancestors we honor 
ourselves ; but the day will surely come when your disinterested labors 
in this direction will be fully appreciated. 

I remain fraternally yours, 

Jos. Henry Dubbs. 



14 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

The following letter from Governor Pattison and extracts 
from letters of Horatio Seymour and Thos. G. Apple to 
Rev. Cort were read : 

FROM THE GOVERNOR. 

Executive Department, Commonwealth of Penn'a, "» 
Office of the Governor, Harrisburg, July 28, 1885. j 
B. F. Winger^ Esq., Greencastle, Pa. 

Sir : I am directed by the Governor to acknowledge your very kind 
invitation to attend the ceremonies of the unveiling and dedication of 
the monument erected to the memory of Enoch Brown and his ten 
scholars who were massacred by Indians one hundred and twenty-one 
years ago, three miles north of Greencastle. The Governor regrets 
that his official engagements which cover the 4th day of August will 
require his presence at Erie, Pa., as President of the commission to 
establish and maintain a Home of Pennsylvania Soldiers and Sailors. 
For this reason he cannot be present. But he directs me to express his 
sincere gratification that the memory of the pioneer school-master is 
thus to be perpetuated and that the children who with him were stricken 
down at their humble shrine of learning are not forgotten by those who 
live in the enjoyment of the Christian civilization of the present day. 
I am Very truly yours, 

Thos. T. Everett, 

Private Secretary. 

The people then returned to their homes highly gratified 
with what they had seen and heard at the Enoch Brown 
Park. All were pleased with the monuments, the iron fences 
and other improvements made by the committee. All were 
delighted with the literary exercises. The poet, who is an 
excellent judge of large experience, remarked in the evening 
" I never heard four better speeches on any public occasion 
than those delivered to-day." He repeatedly announced 
his intention to bring his entire family to Antrim township 
at an early day to show them the beautiful and lasting monu- 
ments and all the historic scenes belonging to the Enoch 
Brown Park. He considered it by far the grandest day ever 
seen in Mother Antrim, and said that the crowd around the 
speaker's stand was larger than " he had ever seen listening 
to a speech of any kind in Franklin County. ' ' 

Many and hearty were the congratulations showered upon 
the chairman of the monument committee at the close of 
the meeting. He felt amply rewarded for all the toil and 



speech of George W. Ziegler^ Esq. 15 

trouble which the monument project has given him by the 
outcome of this red letter day. 

Chief Marshal Col. B. F. Winger performed his duties 
with great tact and efficiency. The following is the list of 
aids as appointed and revised by himself, viz : Wm. Snyder, 
Charles B. Cayl, Edward S. Snively, John W. Kuhn, D. I. 
Binkley, John H. Baumbaugh, John McCulloch, Upton G. 
Hawbaker, Dr. Leslie Lecron, C. C. Pentz, Henry Lenherr, 
W. L. G. linger, Seth Dickey, Dr. H. G. Critzman, Jere- 
miah Ashwa}-, Claggett Seacrest, Wm. J. Zacharias, Max 
Ways, J. W. Wister, Capt. L. Henkell, Paul L. Cort, Geo. 
W. Frye and George Crunkleton. 



SPEECH- OF GEORGE W. ZIEGLER, ESQ., 

OF GREENCASTLE, PENN'A. 

George W. Ziegler, on being chosen president of the 
meeting, spoke as follows : 

Ladies and Gentlemen: — I thank you for the honor of 
the position assigned me as presiding officer of this large 
and respectable meeting on this very interesting and im- 
portant occasion ; and permit me to congratulate you on 
the bright and glorious sun that greets us from a cloudless 
sky, to cheer and gladden our hearts in the enjoyment of 
the ceremonies and intellectual feast that awaits us. 

The wooded hillside upon which we are now assembled 
is sacred and historic ground, consecrated and hallowed by 
the wanton and brutal destruction of human life and spill- 
ing of innocent blood more than a century ago. 

On the 26th day of July, A. D. 1764, a small squad of 
hostile and treacherous Indians made their appearance upon 
these grounds, and with revenge and murder in their hearts 
they stealthily stole their way to the southeastern declivity 
of this hill, where then stood an humble pioneer school 
house, occupied by teacher Enoch Brown and eleven of his 
scholars (thank God the number present on that eventful 
day was not greater), and as soon as it was reached they 
suddenly and fiercely rushed in, and with glaring eyes and 



1 6 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

upraised bludgeons in their hands confronted them, and, 
deaf to the noble appeal of humanity on the part of Brown 
to spare the lives of his scholars, at the sacrifice of his own, 
and their piteous shrieks and cries for mercy, they at once 
commenced the slaughter of master and children, and in 
cold blood massacred the whole school, save little Archie 
McCullough, whom they supposed dead, but who afterward 
revived ; and while teacher and scholars were still agonizing 
in the throes and convulsions of death they proceeded in 
the awful and horrible work of securing their scalps, that 
they might bear them back, in their blood-stained hands, 
as trophies of their victory to the bloodthirsty chieftain, 
who had no doubt detailed them on their revengeful mission 
of destruction and death. 

This act on the part of the Indians is unquestionably the 
most cowardly, bloody and atrocious tragedy that stains 
the annals of our border warfare in the Cumberland valley, 
during the dark and bloody days of its Colonial history ; 
and, although more than a hundred years have come and 
gone since its enactment, yet we cannot listen to its recital 
without a sigh and shudder of sorrow and regret for the sad 
and lamentable fate of its innocent victims. 

But enough of this awful and horrible story, and let us 
now joyfully turn to its interesting and fitting sequel, which 
is about to reach its culmination in the ceremonies of this 
day. 

At a meeting of the Franklin County Centennial Con- 
vention, held in Chambersburg, on the 2 2d day of April, 
1884, the Rev. Cyrus Cort and Col. George B. Wiestling, 
and other public spirited gentlemen of the convention, in- 
duced that body to take action for the adoption of certain 
necessary measures for the promotion and consummation of 
the laudable and commendable movement inaugurated at a 
meeting held by a number of the liberal minded citizens of 
the borough of Greencastle, on the 14th of May, 1883, 
looking to the erection of a monument, &c., to the memory 
of Enoch Brown and his scholars, massacred on this hill on 
the 26th of July, 1764. 

And to these preliminary movements and the untiring 
labors of the Centennial, County and Monument Commit- 



speech of George W. Ziegler^ Esq. 1 7 

tees, and for the faithful, proper and speedy manner in 
which they prosecuted the work assigned them by the 
FrankHn County Centennial Convention, we stand greatly 
indebted this day for the two beautiful and appropriate 
monuments which now grace and adorn this hill. 

The larger of these monuments stands on the site occu- 
pied by the rustic school house at the time of the massacre 
of Schoolmaster Brown and his scholars ; and the other, on 
the small mound, beneath which their sacred dust has long 
since mingled and now peacefully slumbers in the common 
grave in which they were buried. 

And what could have been more fitting than the manner 
and place of their burial? all deposited in the same grave, 
and near beside the little spring, still issuing from the foot 
of this hill, and where master and scholars together were 
wont to slake their thirst during the interim of weary school 
hours. 

These monuments were fashioned by skilful, artistic hands, 
and wrought out of the most enduring materials (Eastern 
granite and Pennsylvania limestone), and rest on deep and 
solid foundations, and will for many long centuries to come 
rescue from oblivion the sacred and hallowed spots they are 
intended to perpetuate. And I feel warranted in the 
prophecy, that should some distant antiquary, more than a 
thousand years hence, make a pilgrimage to this historic 
hill, that he will find them still intact and standing as erect 
as we behold them this day. 

Enoch Brown needed no monument to perpetuate his 
name, it is indelibly engraven in the history of the State, 
and there it will remain forever. ''His is one of the few 
immortal names that were not born to die." 

Yet, as a proper and fitting mark of love and honor to 
this faithful teacher and his lamented scholars, and in ful- 
fillment of a sacred and long neglected duty, these monu- 
ments have been erected and we have met here to-day to 
dedicate them to their memory. 

Note. — I was present at the exhumation of the remains of Teacher 
Enoch Brown and his scholars, and according to the most authentic 
evidence on the subject it took place on the 4th of August, 1843. 1^ 



1 8 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

was my mournful privilege to gaze upon their still remaining moulder- 
ing bones and other relics connected with their burial, and these not only 
established beyond all doubt the identity of the place of their burial, 
but also the truth of the traditional story that they were all buried in 
one common grave. George W. Ziegler. 



PRESENTATION SPEECH OF REV. CYRUS CORT. 

My Christian Friends: — We are glad to meet you here 
to-day. We have had a plentiful rain. He giveth grass for 
the cattle and herb for the service of man. And now the 
skies are bright and the heavens smile upon us. That gracious 
Providence which has enabled us to bring all the difficult 
and dangerous labors of this monumental project to a safe 
and successful conclusion, without harm or accident, still 
continues to favor us. To the Lord be all the praise, the 
honor and the glory of the achievement. 

The greatest leader and lawgiver of the human race tells 
us to "remember the days of old and consider the years 
of many generations." This is the parting counsel of Moses. 
It is the swan song, yea, the key-note of the swan song of 
that man of God at the close of his earthly pilgrimage. 
The trials, the sufferings and heroic deeds of their ancestors, 
the gracious dealings of the great Jehovah in former years, 
were to be kept in everlasting remembrance. A reverential 
historic spirit is one of the noblest attributes of true man- 
hood. It is also one of the safeguards of society. It pro- 
motes the best interests of religion and patriotism. Such a 
spirit makes great account of memorial occasions. It 
brings us into living communion with the heroic past. Under 
the guide and inspiration of a reverential historic spirit the 
Hebrews and Greeks marched in the vanguard of human 
history in developing the ideas of religion and classic culture. 
In the interest of that spirit we are assembled to-day. To- 
day we rescue from oblivion hallowed scenes consecrated by 
the martyr blood of innocent childhood and the self-sacri- 
ficing privations of pioneers. To-day we commemorate a 
typical event, full of pathetic interest and engrave it as a 
memorial in the rock forever. The massacre of School- 



Presentation Speech of Rev. Cyrus Cart. 19 

master Enoch Brown and ten scholars and the horrid mang- 
ling of the eleventh on this spot by the Indian savages, 
July 26, 1764, was an "outrage," says Parkman, "un- 
matched in its fiendlike atrocity through all the annals of 
the war," that terrible Pontiac war, so full of bloodshed 
and horror. It was an event indeed almost unique in human 
history. Hundreds of years before the dawn of the Chris- 
tian era a band of bloodthirsty Thracian soldiers wantonly 
butchered the teacher and all the scholars belonging to a 
boys' school at Megalissus in Greece. For thousands of 
years that event stood alone as an example of human bar- 
barity, as a contrast between civilization and barbarism, 
until it was outdone by the massacre of Enoch Brown and 
his scholars on this very spot 121 years ago. Here Ruth 
Hart and Ruth Hale, George Dunstan, Eben Taylor, Archie 
McCullough and six other innocent children were knocked 
on the head like so many beeves and the bleeding scalps 
torn from their mangled heads and that of Master Enoch 
Brown. O ! bloodiest chapter in the book of time ! Here 
a holocaust was offered to the red Demon of war by the red 
demons of the savage wilderness. 

My Christian friends, it is a sacred duty that we discharge 
to-day in this tribute of the living to the martyred dead. 
Long, too long have the martyrs waited for this memorial. 
No class of men or women deserve more to be held in 
grateful and everlasting remembrance than the hardy pio- 
neers who rescued the wilderness of this new world from 
savage beasts and savage men and changed it into a fruitful 
field. As citizens of this magnificent valley we enjoy the 
fruits of their toils, their sacrifices and privations, and let us 
never forget the memory of their deeds and sufferings. Be- 
cause Enoch Brown was an honored, useful and trusted 
instrument in the higher phases of that work of pioneer 
civilization and progress ; because he fell as a self-sacrificing 
martyr in that cause at the post of duty and of danger ; 
because his eleven scholars fell as innocent victims and true 
martyrs in that cause of education and Christian civilization 
we set apart these monuments and these grounds as sacred 
to their memory forevermore. 

We believe that Enoch Brown was a good and true man. 



ao Enoch Brown Memorial. 

Had we not thought so we would never have toiled as we 
have done to bring this movement to a successful close. He 
was a genuine Christian schoolmaster of the olden time, one 
who taught his scholars not only how to read, write and 
cypher, but who taught them also the first principles of our 
holy religion as recorded in the oracles of the living 
God. Amid perils he taught such principles as make 
good citizens and faithful Christians. Indeed, one of 
the cherished traditions of the terrible tragedy is that 
Schoolmaster Brown was shot down with the Bible in his 
hand before he could make any resistance and on his knees 
begged only that the innocent children might be spared. 
Parkman, in describing the ghastly sight that met those who 
first entered the school house after the massacre says : "In 
the centre lay the master, scalped and lifeless, with a Bible 
clasped in his hands; while around the room were strewn 
the bodies of his mangled pupils." Another tradition says 
that Mr. Linn, while working in a meadow in the vicinity, 
heard the shot that killed Schoolmaster Brown, and when 
he and others came to see what was the matter they found 
little Archie McCullough, who survived the scalping, sitting 
by the spring near by washing the blood from his face and 
mangled head. He told them that when the four Indians 
opened the door Master Brown, knowing well their object, 
begged them to take him as their victim and let the innocent 
children return to their homes. The same instant he was 
shot down, and then he and the children were quickly toma- 
hawked and scalped by two of the savages while the other 
two stood with murderous weapons in the doorway. Other 
traditions, handed down directly by Betty Hopkins to Gen. 
Detrich and others, go to show that Enoch Brown did his 
duty as a true-hearted man, who felt the awful responsibility 
of the sacred trust committed to him. Betty Hopkms was 
a worthy Christian woman, forty years old at the time of the 
massacre, living within a mile of this very spot. She saw 
the mangled bodies of master and ten scholars committed to 
a common grave by the grief-stricken and horror-stricken 
community 121 years ago, and her story of the burial was 
corroborated by the exhumation 79 years after the burial. 
No word derogatory to the courage or character of Enoch 



Presentation Speech of Rev. Cyrus Cort. 21 

Brown ever came from her lips in the sixty odd years that 
she lived in this locality after the tragedy, which was the 
one great absorbing theme of her conversation. Often did 
the General, when a boy, and other young friends read at 
her request her favorite chapter in the Bible (the 1 7th of 
the Gospel according to St. John), and then listen in return 
to the story of the massacre of Enoch Brown and his ten 
scholars. At length this remarkable woman, this traditional 
and Providential bond between the living and the dead, 
passed away at the good old age of 104 years, when she was 
consigned to her last resting place by the General himself. 
Apart from all traditionary accounts, one way and another, 
there is enough in the very nature of things to vindicate the 
memory of Enoch Brown from all aspersions of cowardice 
or incompetency. Cowards are not apt to teach school on 
exposed frontiers in perilous times. The Scotch-Irish pio- 
neer settlers were heroic. God-fearing people. No matter 
what some of their descendants may do they would have 
died in their tracks rather than disappoint a trust, and they 
would never have entrusted the lives and education of their 
precious children to an incompetent poltroon. They were 
brave and true themselves and expected courage, honor and 
fidelity from all in official position. And when the savages 
came in all their fiendish fury and desolated ten Christian 
homes at one fell swoop, by butchering those innocent chil- 
dren on this very spot, when there was bitter lamentation 
and weeping throughout the Conococheague settlement and 
Antrim's hills resounded with the wails of mothers refusing 
to be comforted over the destruction of their darling house- 
hold treasures, think you that those true-hearted, high-souled 
men and women would have buried their precious children 
in a common grave with Enoch Brown had they not es- 
teemed the schoolmaster as a good, true man, who did all 
he could to protect and save the little ones entrusted to his 
care? Never, never, would they have given him such an 
honorable sepulture along with their slaughtered innocents 
had he not been a worthy and deserving man. We know 
little of the particular families represented in this massacre. 
The McCulloughs still remain among our most worthy citi- 
zens. The Harts and Hales, the Dunstans and Taylors, 



a a Enoch Brown Memorial. 

who patronized this school and who furnished a victim each, 
have removed or become extinct so far as we know. We 
know of others, however, who attended this pioneer school, 
who were Providentially absent on that fatal day, and by 
their high character we may judge in a measure the teacher 
and scholars in general. Here came Eleanor Cochrane, 
who became the wife of Captain Joseph Junkin, a hero of 
the Revolutionary War, whose right arm was shattered by 
a musket ball at the battle of Brandywine. She bore him 
14 children, 10 sons and 4 daughters. Two of the sons, 
George and D. X. Junkin, became ministers of the Gospel, 
and two of the daughters married ministers. In all about 
thirty of the sons, sons-in-law and grandchildren are in 
the ministry, and a still larger number are ruling elders. 
Three of the sons were officers in the war of 181 2-14. One 
of the granddaughters is the wife of Col. Preston, at Lex- 
ington, Va., and a gifted poetess. Another granddaughter 
was the wife of the renowned chieftain of the Southern 
Confederacy, Stonewall Jackson. A granddaughter is the 
wife of the reverend gentleman (Rev. Woods,) who will 
speak to you from this stand to-day and we are glad to have 
her with us on the platform enjoying these memorial services 
in honor of the martyred companions of her ancestors. 
What possibilities are enshrined in the life of one little girl ! 
Here also came Mary Ramsey, the grandmother of our ven- 
erable and beloved friend. Rev. John R. Agnew, also present 
with us, and the grandmother also of his excellent wife and 
other notable members of the Agnew family and its kindred 
branches. Two of Mary Ramsey's nieces, the Misses Irwin, 
married sons of President Wm. H. Harrison. Here also 
came the Poes, renowned in civil as well as military affairs. 
You have all heard of the Poe boy who played truant on that 
particular day and watched mowers in a meadow and caught a 
thrashing from his strict old father for telling a lie in the 
evening, claiming that he was at school not having heard of 
the massacre. Bad boys no doubt have often thought of 
this as a justification for playing truant. The moral of the 
fable being that the boy who plays truant saves his scalp. It 
reminds one of the dialogue between a father and a son who 
was hard to get out of bed in the morning : " Tom, get up ; 



Presentation Speech of Rev. Cyrus Cort. 23 

the early bird gets the worm. " " Served him right. If he 
had not been up so early he would not have been caught. ' ' 
Now, my friends, I have a new revelation to make, which 
mars the proportions of the old story somewhat. Last 
Saturday I received a letter from Mrs. Fannie B. Campbell, 
well-known to many present, under date of July 29, at 
Clifton Springs, N. Y. Mrs. Campbell writes : " Dear Mr. 
Cort : Yours received to-day. The only tradition I have 
from the Poe family of the massacre of Enoch Brown and 
children, is that grandfather James Poe was a scholar attend- 
ing the school at the time, but was detained that day by 
his mother objecting to his going on account of the cold. 
He was a very small boy, and had to be sent on horseback in 
charge of a servant. On that day the horse was at the door 
waiting for him when his mother interfered. So his life was 
spared and like the small boy in the Sunday school book, he 
lived to grow up and go to the Legislature twenty years." 
That is the latest tradition of the Poe story, and it would 
be a very acceptable substitute for the truant story if they 
had only left out that cold wave right on the 26th day of 
July, 1764. Benj. M. Nead, Esq., tells us in Dr. Egle's 
" Historical Notes," that at the time James Poe was a lad 
16 years old, and went with the party of settlers under 
Lieut. Potter in pursuit of the Indians who had massacred 
the schoolmaster and scholars at Guitner's school house. 
This spoils the truant boy story again. These conflicting 
traditions show how even good, reliable people get things 
mixed. They remind us of the man who said he once saw 
wheat standing so thick that wild turkeys could run over the 
tops of the heads without sinking to the ground. When 
asked about the size of the turkeys he said they were whop- 
pers. One day he shot one and it was so heavy that he 
threw it over his shoulder and it was so large that the head 
dragged in the snow behind him. When some one remarked 
that that must have been a queer country where they had 
snow in harvest time, he replied, '' I believe I did get my 
story a little mixed." So is it with many of these floating 
traditions. They are a good deal mixed. But be that as 
it may, the Poes and Potters did really stand in close rela- 
tionship to this school. The Lieut. Potter who led in pur- 




24 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

suit of the bloodthirsty Indians afterwards became a Gen- 
eral in the Revolutionary army and James Poe was Captain 
under him and was married to his daughter. *James Poe 
was for many years an honored Representative and Senator 
in the State Legislature. His son Thomas was Adjutant and 
a very gallant soldier in the war of 1 812-14, and fell mor- 
tally wounded in the battle of Chippewa. This gives us an 
idea of the class of people who patronized the school of 
Enoch Brown on these grounds 121 years ago. They be- 
longed to the best class of pioneer settlers, people who came 
to America for conscience sake, that they and their children 
might have freedom to worship God. An eminent historian 
(Dr. Wm. H. Egle) from the capital of our own Keystone 
State is here to-day to tell us about Pontiac **the lord of 
the savage wilderness," who marshalled the savage hordes 
as no Indian chief ever marshalled them before or since, in 
that great war of which this massacre of the master and 
scholars was one of the characteristic incidents. He will 
tell us also about the superb man who hailed from the Alpine 
mountains of Republican Switzerland, the heroic Bouquet, 
who with his Scotch Highlanders, his German-Swiss Royal 
Americans and Provincial Rangers, signally defeated the 
confederates of Pontiac at Bushy Run the year before this 
massacre occurred, and vainly begged the Quaker provincial 
authorities to furnish needed reinforements of a few hun- 
dred men, that he might penetrate the forest fastness and 
conquer peace on the banks of the Muskingum ; how after 
a year of cruel delay and fourteen days after this massacre 
he at length was able to set out from Carlisle on that memor- 
able campaign of 1 764, which brought peace and tranquility 
to the borders and restored several hundred white captives 
to the blessings of Christian homes and civilization. 
Strange, passing strange it is, that the plowshare should so 
long have been allowed to pass over the site of the school 
house and the harvests fertilized by the blood of master and 
scholars should so long have been reaped on this sacred spot. 
Strange that the common grave of master and ten scholars 



*Both of these officers lie buried at the Brown's Mill graveyard, a few 
miles east of the Enoch Brown Park. 



Presentation speech of Rev. Cyrus Cort. 25 

that this the most sacred historic spot of our noble old county, 
should remain so long without monumental column or memo- 
rial tablet, to be profanely trodden under foot of man and 
beast. Thank God that reproach no longer rests upon the 
people of Franklin county and Antrim township. In this 
hour of rejoicing, when the capstone is to be brought forth, 
as it were, with shoutings, let us not forget the veterans who 
forty-two years ago exhumed the remains of Enoch Brown 
and scholars, who identified the grave and verified the tradi- 
tion of their common sepulture. Without their pioneer 
work the waves of oblivion would doubtless long since have 
obliterated all traces of that hallowed spot, fuller of pathetic 
interest than any other in all the broad domain of the Cum- 
berland Valley. We are glad to welcome these veterans 
to-day. They bind us with golden chains to the hoary past. 
We are glad to have one of them, Geo. W. Ziegler, Esq., 
preside over these memorial services, who has been a great 
help and inspiration in this movement. Also to have two 
others, Dr. J. K. Davison and Gen. Detrich, as vice presi- 
dents, all enjoying a good old age. In the language, slightly 
modified, of the immortal Webster to the veterans of Bunker 
Hill, sixty years ago, allow me to say '' Venerable men ! 
you have come down to us from a former generation. 
Heaven has bounteously lengthened out your lives that you 
might behold this joyous day. You are now where you 
stood forty-two years ago this very hour with your brothers 
and neighbors in philanthropic efforts. Behold how altered. 
The same heavens are indeed over your heads, the same 
fountain flows at your feet. But all else how changed ! 
Alas ! you are not all here — Koser, Michaels, Rankin, Sites, 
Grubb, Rowe, Mitchell, Osbaugh, Short, Shirey, Atherton, 
our eyes seek in vain for you amidst this broken band. You 
are gathered to you fathers but live in our grateful remem- 
brances. * * All is peace and God has granted you this 
sight of your country's happiness ere you slumber in the 
grave forever. He has allowed you to partake of the reward 
of your patriotic toils ; and he has allowed us, your sons and 
countrymen, to meet you here and in the name of the pres- 
ent generation, in the name of your country, in the name of 
liberty and civilization, to thank you. * * May the 

B 






26 Enoch Brown Menwriat. 

Father of all mercies smile upon your declining years and 
bless them." 

We are glad to hail to-day as our gifted Poet and a true 
son of Antrim, one who years ago labored to bring about 
this very memorial work which has at last been accomplished 
under the auspices of the county at large. All honor to 
the pioneer settlers and all honor to the pioneer workers in 
the movement to honor the memory of Enoch Brown and 
his slaughtered scholars. 

On the 2 2d day of April, 1884, a convention of represen- 
tative delegates from all parts of Franklin county, met in the 
Court House at Chambersburg, to devise measures to pro- 
mote the proper celebration of the one hundredth anniver- 
sary of the organization of the county, on the coming 9th of 
September. In the progress of their deliberations, it was 
resolved at the instance of Col. Geo. B. Wiestling, that a 
permanent memorial of the Centennial should be erected in 
the form of a monument, to perpetuate the memory of School- 
master Brown, and the ten scholars ruthlessly massacred by 
the Indians on this spot, 120 years previous. An appeal 
was made by the convention to the patriotic and Christian 
liberality of all the churches and schools, both secular and 
religious, week day and Sunday schools throughout the 
county,in aid of this enterprise, also to public spirited citizens 
in their individual capacity. The Centennial Executive 
Committee at Chambersburg was directed by the Conven- 
tion to secure a generous rebate in aid of this monument 
fund, from all the railroads, on all excursion tickets issued 
on account of the Centennial Celebration. This was the 
unanimous action of the Convention, and the sum of at 
least ^2,000 was pledged to the Monument Committee, 
which I have the honor to represent, wherewith to buy the 
land, erect the monument and make all other needed im- 
provements. The Monument Committee have honestly and 
earnestly striven to carry out in good faith the wishes of the 
County Centennial Convention as best they could with the 
means placed at their disposal. They had a right to expect 
the generous assistance and hearty co-operation of every 
preacher, teacher, sclfblar and public spirited citizen of the 
county. The faith of the entire county was pledged to 



I 



Presentation Speech of Rev. Cyrus Cort. 27 

make the monumental project a grand success. But, alas ! 
your committee was doomed to bitter disappointment. A 
generous rebate amounting to ;^758 was contributed by the 
railroads, as the Convention had requested, but ^334 of 
that rebate never came into the hands of our Monument 
Committee. The bad example of this breach of faith in of- 
ficial circles was contagious and had a demoralizing effect. 
The majority of churches and schools of all kinds have 
utterly failed to do their duty in the premises. In all, up to 
date, your Committee has received less than ^1,400, instead 
of at least ^2,000, solemnly pledged by the sovereign con- 
vention, April 22, 1884. Of this amount, ;^9i.77 has been 
contributed by the churches; about ^260 by the week day 
schools, and the same amount (^260) by the Sunday schools 
of the county. Had it not been tor the liberal subscriptions 
of individuals, headed by Geo. W. Ziegler, Esq., amounting 
in all to ^335, your committee would have been seriously 
hindered in the prosecution of their work. Although the 
public schools of Green castle with their six teachers and 
hundreds of scholars, only gave $5.75, yet Antrim township 
and Greencastle raised the handsome sum of ^332. Well done 
for Mother Antrim ! She has raised nearly one-fourth of 
the entire cost. 

We point to this noble and enduring granite monument 
erected on the very spot where Enoch Brown and his ten 
scholars shed their precious blood, 121 years ago ; we point 
to the smaller, but equally enduring and appropriate monu- 
ment, which, beautiful in its simplicity, a few rods from here, 
maiks the spot where repose in a common grave the mortal 
remains of the massacred master and scholars; we point like- 
wise to this picturesque park of field and forest, containing a 
fraction less than twenty acres, all paid for and held in fee 
simple by your committee in trust for the people of the 
county, this tract which encloses the historic spring at the 
bottom of the hill, where little Archie McCullough washed 
the streaming blood from his face and scalpless head ; we 
point to these memorials and possessions as the best answer 
to the question as to how we have discharged our duties as 
custodians of the Enoch Brown Monument Fund. In the 
face of all manner of obstacles ; in spite of all manner of 



28 Enoch Brown Memorial . 

misrepresentation and abuse, we have persistently labored to 
carry out in good faith the patriotic and benevolent inten- 
tions of the Centennial Convention. As the walls of Jerusa- 
lem were built in the days of Nehemiah, with sword in one 
hand and trowel in the other, so this monument project has 
been carried forward. The memory of Enoch Brown, the 
noble-hearted, self-sacrificing Christian schoolmaster, has 
been vindicated against unjust aspersions, and after the lapse 
of 1 2 1 years, a granite monument, as enduring ^ the grand 
old mountains that loom up in majesty on the sides of 
the North, now covers the spot where he and his youthful 
scholars fell as pioneer martyrs in the cause of education and 
Christian civilization. 

The question has been asked time and again, "What 
good will the monument do? Why go to all this trouble 
and expense about people killed 121 years ago?" We can 
not expect to satisfy some people with any argument that 
we may offer. Like the terrapins or land turtles that lately 
crawled around the grave of Enoch Brown and scholars, 
they have no reverential historic spirit and mope about most 
sacred scenes concerned entirely with the question, what 
shall we eat or what shall we drink ? But for thinking men 
and the rising generations the monuments will teach an im- 
portant lesson and have an enobling educational influence. 
It will open up to many a most important chapter of history 
and fill their hearts with gratitude to the brave men and 
women who bore the brunts in the fierce struggle between 
civilization and barbarism. In the language of Horatio 
Seymour, in his letter to the chairman of your committee, 
these monuments " will tell us of the past and instruct with 
regard to the duties of life and the virtues of patriotism. 
We feel as we look upon them that the dead speak to us. 
They will do much to instruct and improve our citizens. ' ' 
It will show that this generation had some higher thoughts 
and aspirations than the mere scramble after filthy lucre, the 
degrading worship of Mammon. As Webster argued at 
Bunker Hill, it will evoke and appeal not only to lofty 
thoughts, but to that other important part of our being 
which has so much to do with the interests of religion and 
patriotism, *' to sentiment and imagination." And where 



Presentation Speech of Rev. Cyrus Cort. 29 

in all the realms of romance and fancy do we find a more 
pathetic story than the massacre and common burial of 
Enoch Brown and scholars? The simple recital of this 
terrible tragedy stirs emotions at times too deep for tears. 
And, my friends, rest assured that when all the beauty and 
chivalry of Franklin county, here assembled to-day, shall 
sleep beneath the green clods of the valley, this place will be 
a pilgrim shrine, increasing in interest as age after age rolls 
by. These are 

" Shrines to code nor creed confined, 

The Delphian vales, the Palestines, 

The Meccas of the mind." 

I pity the person who has so little patriotic and religious 
sentiment as to ask, as some are doing: ''What good will 
the monument do ? Might not this money have been ap- 
plied to more useful purposes ? Why not give it to the poor 
or the Children's Aid Society of Chambersburg ?" This is 
but the doleful echo of that harsh old mercenary and selfish 
spirit which found its proper exponent in Judas Iscariot, 
who was filled with indignation because the grateful Mary 
anointed the blessed Master with three hundred penny- 
worth of precious ointment. ''Might not this have been 
sold and given to the poor," exclaimed the arch traitor and 
thief. Over against this sanctimonious and Pharisaic spirit 
we place the gracious words of the blessed Master: "Let 
her alone. Why trouble ye her ? She hath done what she 
could. She hath wrought a good work on me. Against 
the day of my burying she hath kept this. For ye have the 
poor with you always, and whensoever ye will ye may do 
them good, but me ye have not always. Verily I say unto 
you, wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout 
the whole world, this also that she hath done shall be spoken 
of for a memorial of her. ' ' Like the odor of a sweet smell 
the fragrance of that self-sacrificing deed of love comes float- 
ing down the ages full of instruction and heavenly benediction . 
Away with that low, groveling, utilitarian spirit which dares 
to rob the world of its beauty, its sunshine and song, which 
measures by dollars and cents the immeasurable debt of 
gratitude due our heroic pioneer ancestors ! 

Thank God, the debt so long unpaid, and the work so 
long delayed, has not been entirely forgotten. All honor to 
the Centennial County Convention, of April 22, '84, and to 
all the good people who have helped with their dimes and 
dollars to build the monument. We wish the monument 
was worthier the wealthy county on whose bosom it stands. 
But such as it is, we take pleasure in handing it over to the 
teachers, scholars and citizens of Franklin county. Here is 
■embodied the spirit of generous-hearted patriotism. Here are 
concentrated the offsprings of the poor and the rich, the dime 
of the bare-footed school boy and school girl, and the liberal 
benefactions of the wealthy. Here, too, the rich and poor 
will meet together for ages, and dwell upon the toils and 
trials of pioneer settlers, as illustrated in the massacre and 
burial of master and scholars in a common grave. 

And now, in behalf of the Enoch Brown Monument Com- 
mittee, appointed April 22, 1884, by the Frankhn County 
Centennial Convention, I hand over these monuments, these 
hallowed grounds, all these rare historic treasures, to the 
teachers, scholars and people of Franklin county, to be cher- 
ished throughout all coming generations. Without debt or 
incumbrance, we give them. Here in my hand I hold the 
deed for these lands in fee simple given in trust for the use 
of the schools and the people. Take them, and may they 
be an inspiration and a benediction through all coming time, 
helping posterity to '' remember the days of old and consider 
the years of many generations. ' ' God bless the teachers, 
scholars and people of Franklin county. 



ADDRESS OF PETER A. WITHER, ESQ. 

OF HAGERSTOWN, MD., 
And Superintendent of Public Schools in Washington County , Md. 

Upon the invitation of the committee having charge of 
these memorial ceremonies, I am here, as a representative of 
your sister State of Maryland, to join in the tribute which 
we are met to pay to the manly sacrifices, and heroic endur- 
ance of the pioneers who here conquered the untamed wild- 
ness of nature, that we, their children and successors, might 



Address of Peter A. Witmer, Esq. 31. 

enjoy, in peace and prosperity, the fertile soil, the health- 
giving climate, the beautiful scenery, and the happy homes 
which have made the Cumberland Valley the synonym of 
the '' Paradise of America." 

We are met, as I understand it, to recall the days when 
this beautiful valley was covered with primeval forests, and 
a robust, but some crude, civilization was pressing forward 
to conquer the wildness of nature and the still more stub- 
bom wildness of the savage inhabitants who roamed at will 
over these hills and through these valleys. We stand, to-day, 
on what, one hundred and- twenty years ago, was the utmost 
verge of American civilization. Beyond, toward the setting 
sun, was a howling wilderness; yonder, toward the rising 
sun, thirteen feeble colonies, apparently depending for exis- 
tence upon the mother country across the seas, inhabited by 
less than 3,000,000 people, constituted the Anglo-Saxon 
contingent which was to win to civilization and to freedom 
the grandest empire the world has ever seen. To-day that 
conquest has been made. Look around you and behold it. 
An almost limitless expanse of territory, reaching from 
ocean to ocean and from the lakes to the gulf; embracing 
every variety of surface, soil and climate, studded with 
cities and villas, with commercial marts and thriving inland 
towns, through which courses, in ceaseless pulsations, the 
full tide of an ever restless commerce ; traversed by 125,000 
miles of railways, which carry your products on the wings 
of the winds, chequered by 500,000 miles of electric wires, 
which transmit intelligence with the velocity of thought, 
watered by a thousand rivers, which make your valleys 
bloom and bourgeon like an Eden ; filled with an active, 
busy, bustling population, the whole ruled by what we be- 
lieve to be the best government ever organized by man. 
See, all over your land, the studios of art, where the skill 
of the painter makes, instinct with beauty, the living canvas, 
and the sculptor's genius moulds the breathing marble into 
forms of life, and soul and passion ; your courts, where 
Justice sits enthroned, crowned with a people's majesty, 
your halls of Legislature, where eloquence ^' rules her 
wilderness of free minds, ' ' your schools, and colleges, and 
universities, where the youth of the land are trained to meet 



32 Enoch Brown Memorial . 

like men the responsibilities of life, your eleemosynary- 
institutions, where charity comes like a benediction to so 
many weary hearts, your Sunday-schools, the great auxiliaries 
of the church in the work of human redemption ; and, 
finally, your churches, the beautiful architectural creations 
of Christian ingenuity, and opulent devotion, whose spires 
are pointing the hopes of immortal flocks to the great 
Unseen Shepherd, while their choirs and organs pour forth, 
over hill and valley, a full tide of choral harmony, which, 
swelling in one grand diapason to the heavens, dies away at 
last in soft melodious cadence, at the foot of the throne of 
Him whose praise it celebrates. 

This and more than this is your country. Such is the 
structure which has been reared upon foundations laid 
strong, and deep, and broad, by the men whose virtues and 
heroism we are here to-day to recount and commemorate. 

In this connection I have been asked to refer to the part 
which Maryland took in the stirring events which have been 
so eloquently portrayed by the gentlemen who have already 
addressed you, and whilst I shall not enter upon historical 
details, I may say, generally, that Maryland in the colonial 
days stood fast by the fortunes of her sister colonies. Her 
fame is full of honor, in peace and in war. Sprung directly 
from the loins of the mother country, her sons inherited the 
spirit of freedom which wrung from King John the Magna 
Charta, and, subsequently, from England's royal line, still 
greater concessions. Imbued with that spirit, the founders 
of Maryland, when they landed on St. Mary's shore, planted 
there the emblem of Christ's suffering and man's salvation, 
and forever dedicated her soil to civil and religious liberty. 
She contributed freely of her blood and treasure to defend 
herself and her sister colonies from the rude assaults of the 
savage, and the more insidious but more dangerous advances 
of English tyranny, and if she failed to send a proper con- 
tingent to the Pontiac war it was because she was even then 
resisting the first attempts of England to tax the resources 
of the colonies to fill her depleted coffers. She became, as 
you all know, with your own great State, a child of the 
Revolution, and received upon her head its baptism of fire 
and blood. 



Address of Peter A. Witmer, Esq. 33 

The Maryland Line met the scarlet uniform and the glit- 
tering steel of England from the first dark hours of Bunker 
Hill to the final and triumphant glory at Yorktown, and she 
points with pride to her brilliant record through all that 
long and bloody career. 

It is enough to know, my friends, that through the suffer- 
ings, the sacrifices and the many achievements of our 
fathers, to whose memory we have this day met to do honor, 
we are permitted to enjoy the priceless blessings of American 
liberty, and I shrink from claiming for the State which I 
have the honor to represent, and which I love so well, credit 
or fame, in any degree above that which belongs to each of 
the whole glorious thirteen. 

But this occasion suggests another train of thought. We 
are here to dedicate a monument to the humble man, Enoch 
Brown, the teacher, who with his pupils, and on this very 
spot, fell a victim to the savage ferocity of the Indian and 
to duty. The world is full of monuments, but their inscrip- 
tions usually blazon the deeds of warriors, statesmen, poets. 
Rarely does the world rear the monumental pile to the 
humble school teacher. Fidelity, honor, faith, truth may 
all be his, and a moral heroism which, in the path of duty, 
scorns to turn aside from death ; but these evoke no admira- 
tion. The glamour of war, the triumphs of eloquence, the 
rapt genius of poetry and art — these only are deemed 
worthy the homage of men. But here, one hundred and 
twenty-one years ago, a nobler man than warrior, politician, 
or poet, fell a martyr to duty and to civilization ; therefore, 
it is fit that we raise this monument. It is right that the 
moral heroism, the undaunted courage, the sublime and 
splendid disregard of self and life which Enoch Brown ex- 
hibited should be perpetuated in stone, which, I trust, will 
be as enduring as the eternal hills that now look down upon 
it. True, he who lived so well, and died so nobly, and 
sleeps so calmly here, may not know what we now do. 

No storied urn, or animated bust, 
Back to its mansion calls the fleeting breath ; 
Nor Honor's voice provokes the silent dust, 
Nor Flattery soothes the dull, cold ear of death ; 

but 1 believe that at the last Grand Assize, when the Judge 



34 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

of all the earth shall pronounce humanity's final doom, ft 
shall be said of Enoch Brown, as Christ said of Mary, he 
hath done what he could. 

With the spirit of our Great Exemplar, he begged his 
brutal murderers to spare his pupils and take his life as a 
vicarious offering for them, And here is one great lesson 
that teachers may well learn — the lesson of love for those 
placed under their care. Love your pupils and they will 
reciprocate the feeling with all the fervor that glows in 
young hearts. Let them feel that you are their friend, not 
their master, and the spirit of insubordination will give way 
to confidence and trust. 

This brings me, my friends, to a brief presentation of 
another subject which. the mandate of your committee im- 
poses — the educational idea suggested by these ceremonies. 

Time will not permit me to enter into any general history 
of education, nor indeed, of this country. A rapid review 
of educational movements in your own great commonwealth 
is all that can be attempted. 

It is well known that education in our early colonial time, 
and for many years after, was under the supervision and 
control of the various religious organizations of the country, 
and it is altogether probable that the school conducted here 
by Enoch Brown was, in some sort, a parochial school. 

It is true that almost every colony had on its statute 
books provisions for the establishment of schools for the 
general education of the people, in other words, public schools; 
still these laws were, for different reasons, generally ineffec- 
tive and inoperative. 

As early as 1787, the General Government, in the famous 
ordinance for the government of the North-West Territory, 
set apart the sixteenth section of land in every township for 
the maintenance of public schools, basing their action upon 
the memorable declaration, that ''Religion, morality and 
knowledge, being necessary to good government and the 
happiness of mankind, schools and the means of educa- 
tion shall be forever encouraged." Under this, and subse- 
quent similar grants, an aggregate of not less than 140,000,- 
000 acres of land have been set apart by the Government 
for educational purposes. Thus, early in the history of our 



Address of Peter A. Witmer, JEsq, 35 

country, the General Government placed itself upon record 
as committed to the principles upon which our free or com- 
mon schools of to-day are founded. Coming to the history 
of public instruction in your own great State, we find that 
so early as 1682, William Penn inserted in the form of 
government for his new province the provision, that "The 
Governor and the Provincial Council should erect and 
order all public schools," but the authority so vested was 
not exercised until many years after. 

Your constitutions of 1776 and 1790 both contained pro- 
visions for the establishment of schools throughout the 
State, in which the poor were to be taught gratis, but the 
benevolent intentions of those who enacted these provisions 
were thwarted from the fact that they imposed the badge of 
poverty upon a certain element in the community, who 
resented with spirit the reproach which they believed such 
legislation was intended to fix upon them. The Act of 
your Assembly, passed in 1809, contained the same objec- 
tionable features and it was not until 181 8 that legislation 
was secured, through the efforts of a number of the most 
prominent citizens of your State, which was supposed to 
abolish all class distinctions. This legislation was, however, 
local in its character, and applied only to the city of Phila- 
delphia, and, even there, failed to remove the impression 
that it fixed the stigma of pauperism upon the poorer 
classes, as all previous laws were supposed to have done. 
The experiments which had been tried, and the efforts which 
had been made to establish a common school system, culmi- 
nated in the passage of an Act in 1 834, amended and improved 
in 1836, which is really the first common school law of this 
commonwealth. It established schools for the instruction 
of youth without regard to social or pecuniary condition. 
It established them upon the broad principles that public 
education is a public necessity, and must be maintaftied at 
public expense — that access to your schools must be free to 
all, just as access is free to any other public institution 
established for public comfort, convenience and use. There 
has been legislation affecting your public schools since 1835, 
but this legislation incorporated only such improvements as 
experience and an advancing civilization suggested, and 



36 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

now your school system stands boldly out as one of the most 
important factors of those splendid commercial, social and 
educational results which Pennsylvania to-day presents to 
the world. A State which appropriates annually ten mil- 
lions in money for the support of 2,300 teachers, and the 
education of 1,000,000 of her children, may well be proud 
of her educational record. 

And now, my friends, is it necessary to inquire what this 
school system is worth, or to ask whether the results justify 
the expenditures ? As one who has been identified with the 
work of public instruction, in my own State, lor the last 
eighteen years, I say, with entire confidence in the truth of 
my statement, that your public school system is worth all 
that you pay for it. 

We assume as postulates the trite propositions first, that 
our form of government is founded in and rests upon the 
virtue and intelligence of the people ; secondly, that the 
public or common school is the best vehicle for the dissemi- 
nation of this public virtue and popular intelligence. I 
shall not stop to discuss these propositions, since, whilst 
they do not probably challenge universal assent, we appre- 
hend no gentleman would risk his reputation for knowledge 
of the essential characteristics of our national life by disput- 
ing the first, and no ambitious politician, aspiring to the 
spoils of office, would venture to do violence to the settled 
convictions of his constituents by publicly demurring to the 
second. The school house is everywhere, all over this land, 
regarded as an exponent of our civilization, I may say, in- 
deed, as one of its pioneers, for whenever on broad prairie, 
or in fertile Western valley, or on auriferous mountain side, 
the sturdy emigrant presses his way to subjugate the forest, 
turn the virgin soil, or open the mine, there, too, we find 
the school house, at once the emblem of our civilization and 
the perpetual promise of intellectual progress to our country. 
I know that there are men in every State, and in every com- 
munity, men who, while professing to criticise only defects 
in the system, strike at its very life. These gentlemen say 
that your public school system is simply a great charity for 
the benefit of the poor, and should therefore be limited to 
the most elementary instruction, while the money intended 



Address of Peter A. Witmer, Esq, 37 

for its support should be doled out with something of the 
liberality which a miser exhibits in dispensing alms. Your 
schools, my friends, are no more a charity than your courts 
or your roads maintained at public expense for the bgnefit 
and convenience of all. Again these critics say the train- 
ing received at public schools unfit some people for their 
proper sphere in life, in other words, it makes the poor 
young man dissatisfied with his lot. In answer to this, I 
thank God that it does. Who shall fix any boy's future 
position in this life, in this age, and especially in this free 
America, where we recognize no royalty of blood but that 
which shows itself in an honest, earnest, manly life; no 
aristocracy but the aristocracy of the intellect ; no nobility 
but that which derives its letters-patent from the King of 
Kings. I thank God for the aspirations which glow in the 
young hearts of the poor boys all over this land toward a 
better, a nobler and a higher life, and I pity the folly and 
the imbecility of the man who would seek to repress these 
aspirations or fix in a mould the future destiny of the youth 
of this country. As well attempt to bridle the winds or 
chain the cyclone, or to crush out the hope that lives in 
every Christian heart, of a happy life beyond the dark- 
flowing river. I appeal to every father and mother in this 
presence not to repress or hamper the development of mind 
in their children. We know not what possibilities of action 
and achievement are wrapped up in their young souls, and 
we should prove recreant to every parental duty and relation 
should we attempt to fix limits to the development of these 
possibilities. 

That we are a much better educated people than we were 
a half century ago will not be disputed, and this is due, in 
our opinion, in a great degree, to the prevailing belief 
that education enables a man to lift himself in the social 
scale and generally to improve his condition in life. The 
public school is the most potential agency in this general 
diffusion of intelligence, and it, therefore, becomes a people, 
who would occupy a front rank among the States of the 
Union, to foster their public school system. 

It may have defects, it has defects, but its work is none 
the less important, and its triumphs have been none the less 



38 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

decisive, and my admonition to you, my friends, citizens of 
this great commonwealth, is to protect it, cherish it, and 
with a spirit rising into chivalry, and a love deepening into 
reverence, defend it through sunshine and storm. 

Tcf the teachers of Franklin county, who have contributed 
of their means and their labors to raise this monument, and 
who are here to commemorate the work and the service of 
one of their honorable profession, I may be permitted a 
word by way of suggestion and encouragement. I would 
have them remember that this is an age of remarkable 
mental activity. In every department of thought we note 
the earnest inquiries and anxious investigations of the fore- 
most minds of the age. It would be strange if in investiga- 
tions so far reaching, and all embracing the educational 
field, should be neglected. It has not been neglected, and 
in no department of inquiry shall we find greater activity 
than in that which concerns so vitally the welfare of the 
youth of this country. It is, therefore, your duty as intelli- 
gent teachers to keep fully abreast of the advanced thought 
of the day upon all questions relating to the proper educa- 
tion of children. You must not forget that you are the 
vanguard of that grand procession of the nations which is 
pressing along the world's highways to the world's ideal 
standard of perfection. It is your mission to teach the 
youth of the country that there are nobler things in life than 
military glory, or hoarded wealth, than the arts of the poli- 
tician, or the tricks of modern statesmanship — that a pro- 
gressive civilization is leading us onward and upward to 
higher and grander purposes of existence, to be wrought out 
not on the battle field, nor in heated political contests, nor 
even in the busy marts of trade, but in the quiet, peaceful 
homes, all over this broad land, where every unbought grace 
of life shall find its full development, and every manly in- 
stinct some object worthy of its loftiest aim. 

Your work embraces all humanity, and in its elevation of 
that humanity to a higher plane, in inculcating just concep- 
tion of moral, social and political duty, and in illustrating 
a broader brotherhood, a more generous civilization, and a 
more spiritual Christianity, there are fields of bloodless tri- 
umph grander far than ever hero conquered, and there are 



Address of Rev. F. M. Woods. 39 

guerdons to be won, such as we award to-day to Enoch 
Brown, richer far than the laurel crown of olden Greece. 
May you, as teachers, by the honest, intelligent and consci- 
entious discharge of every duty deserve to win that grander 
triumph and to wear that richer guerdon ; and may we all, 
my friends, as parents and guardians, be faithful to every 
obligation which our relations to the children impose, and 
so rest in the hope that they will revel, for ages and ages to 
come, in the full fruition of the splendid realities which we 
so fondly anticipate for them and for our country. 



ADDRESS OF REV. F. M. WOODS, 

OF MARTINSBURG, W. VA. 
THE SCOTCH-IRISH PIONEERS OF OUR COUNTRY. 

It is difficult for us to realize that only one short century 
and a quarter have passed since the hands of ruthless savages 
were steeped in the blood of helpless victims, upon the very 
spot where here to-day we stand. When you tell me that 
once this fair field was stained with the carnage of murdered 
school children ; that this lovely valley once rang and re- 
echoed with the wild shout of the redman, I feel disposed 
to ask, in view of what now meets the eye, how many hun- 
dreds of years must have elapsed since these things were 
seen and heard ? 

God's purposes of grace and of providence unfold very 
fast. The Indian was an unprofitable tenant of this great 
land, and it was needful for him to give way to another and 
better. Selfish greed drew multitudes, who thought to 
pluck the Indian's title from his hand by violence and fraud. 
The Spaniard must stand condemned as the bloody and un- 
just aggressor, in that day when justice shall poise her in- 
fallible scales, to determine the relative guilt of the Chris- 
tian and the pagan. The Castilians and the many adven- 
turers who followed in their wake, proved themselves as little 
worthy to hold the continent as their predecessors had 
been. These were not the men whom God had in prepara- 



40 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

tion for the inheritance of this vast estate. They were but as 
the dust, and the chaff and the dried leaves, which the com- 
ing storm gathers up upon the weapons of its vanguard and 
tosses in wild sport before it. The rain which enriches the 
earth and makes it fruitful, and supplies its fountains, comes 
in the storm, carrying the lightning for its torch, and the 
thunder for the diapason of its martial music. Another race 
of people, trained in a different school; animated by differ- 
ent ambitions ; impelled by different motives, were destined 
to cross over into this fair land and claim it in the name of 
the great King, and to establish His throne as the basis and 
security of their own rights and the glory of their wide 
dominion. The stones ot this great temple of freedom were 
being hewn in the vast quarries of Europe. Rabid fana- 
ticism was made to be the pedagogue to train and discipline 
a body of men and women for the task of rescuing this coun- 
try from the grasp of its heathen occupants, and of redeem- 
ing it to liberty. 

The history of this valley and of the entire country, is 
very largely influenced by the character of the Scotch-Irish 
Presbyterianism of those early days. The Scotchman per- 
secuted in his own country, migrated to the west of the 
channel dividing him from Ireland, and there sought liberty 
of worship. Mingling his blood with that of his new neigh- 
bors, there resulted a compound of force and tenacity, which 
has made the Scotch-Irishman almost a distinct race of be- 
ing. Finding no rest for the sole of his foot in this home 
of his adoption, he again took his life in hand and gathered 
up his meagre substance, launched forth upon the ocean to 
find his abode where religious liberty could be enjoyed. 
This brought him to America, where he could worship God 
according to the dictates of a conscience enlightened and 
instructed by the word of God. These are the men whom 
we are proud to call our forefathers ; and theirs was a faith 
to which their descendants for a thousand generations may 
well be glad to do reverence. May we and our children, 
and theirs in turn, have the wisdom and the grace, and the 
courage to emulate it ! 

It is proper for us, to-day and here in the presence of this 
beautiful monument, to recall some of the more salient 



Address of Rev. F. M. Woods 41 

points in the character of those old worthies, to whose noble 
principles and true bravery we owe so much. For with their 
sword and their bow they achieved for us the glorious 
record of independence. 

I. It is to be noted that they were not worthless adven- 
turers or mere explorers, or the apostles of a godless civiliza- 
tion. They were not the seekers of worldly treasure sim- 
ply. It was not mercenary greed which influenced their zeal. 
They were in search of a religious home, and of liberty of 
conscience. It was the honor of God and the blessings of 
the gospel of peace which they were resolved to secure. 
These privileges were denied them in their fatherland. 
They could easily have purchased a peace and remained in 
the countries from which they came, had they been willing 
to abjure their principles and their faith, and to sub- 
mit with plastic grace to the imperious will of a religious 
despotism. The three Hebrews of Martyr Spirit, could 
have obtained a like disgraceful immunity, could they have 
smothered the protests of their faithful consciences and 
bowed in tame submission to the Chaldean monarch's tyran- 
nical will, and worshipped the great image which he set up in 
the plain of Dura. But fired by the mighty impulse of in- 
domitable principles, they chose the flames rather than 
cowardly obedience. Of like character was the spirit of 
these dauntless men, who with wives and mothers, and 
daughters, forsook all and followed Christ into these wild 
wastes. They brought the precious Bible with them, and 
they loved its truths, and fed upon them as upon manna. 
The word of God was the Man of their counsel. They 
sought unto it in all their troubles and shaped their lives by 
it. Their children were taught "to fear God and to keep 
His commandments," understanding that herein is ''the 
whole of man." Their religion was to them a constant 
living reality. They did not keep it as a fashionable pre- 
tense, a flimsy robe of bright fastastic texture, which never 
saw the light, except on public and stated occasions. It 
was their ''vade mecum." In the field, or in the forest ; 
at home or on the march, or in the face of the foe, their God 
was their first consideration. Right was the law of life and 
the principle of action to them. 



42 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

It will be readily conceded that men of this character 
could not be easily diverted from their purpose. Neither 
fear nor favor could disarm them. It is Christian principle 
which makes the best citizen, the best friend, the best 
neighbor, the best ruler. Christian principle makes the 
best pioneers. When men go out to do better for their 
rights with the Bible in their hands, and the fear of God in 
their hearts, they are a dangerous foe to meet. It is ex- 
tremely difficult to persuade them of defeat. They strike 
with an arm of iron, and the fire of their wrath is unquench- 
able till justice is satisfied and truth has been vindicated. 
The men who sought these shores for gold and silver, or in 
the spirit of discovery, were not the men who gave nerve 
and stabihty to the institutions whose foundations were laid 
amid the troubled waves and the rushing waters of those 
early days. The spirit of John Knox and of Patrick Ham- 
ilton, and of Geo. Wishart, is alone able to meet and over- 
come the obstacles which the men of that day had to en- 
counter. 

2. The sufferings and trials to which these early settlers 
were subjected in the Old World, were a further step in the 
preparations through which Divine Providence was fitting 
them for their high and honorable destiny. Inured to hardship 
and to honest toil, the valorous sons and daughters of Eng- 
land, Scotland, France, Holland, Switzerland, Germany 
and Ireland, fearlessly came to these shores to conquer the 
unsubdued forests and win a righteous peace, and enjoy a 
godly independence. Holding to the essential principles of 
our common Presbyterianism, and deeply imbibing the 
rugged truths of a sturdy Calvinism, they were well calcu- 
lated to " endure hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ," 
and to bring into subjection the rude natives and their howl- 
ing desert home. They were accustomed to be driven from 
their homes and from one country to another. They were 
hunted like wild beasts. They had seen their comrades 
butchered in cold blood. Wives and husbands were torn 
cruelly from each other, and their children were slaughtered 
heartlessly before their eyes. They were exposed to hunger 
and thirst, and nakedness, they learned by the bitterness of 
experience, the full value of every privation. Their Chris- 



Address of Rev. F. M. Woods. 43 

tian (!) persecuters on that side of the ocean were more 
merciless and savage than the bloody Indian with his scalp- 
ing-knife and tomahawk on this. Raised in comfort, many 
of them in luxury, they gave up home and became wan- 
derers and strangers, dwelling in dens and caves. But these 
things only served to give an iron tone to the nerves of their 
spiritual being. Hardship had no terrors for men of this 
stamp. They were trained by dark adversity for the gigantic 
struggles of the arena on this western continent. Their arms 
were made strong to fell the great trees, and to subdue the 
ground, and to drive back the cruel foes who met them in 
these forests. The task was far removed from the condi- 
tions of the child's play. Theirs was the death-grasp with 
an enemy who was in furious earnest. He who would meet 
these Greeks, must himself be a Greek of the Greeks. ''Be- 
hold they that wear soft clothing are in Kings' houses" — 
not on the borders, fighting the Indians, and daring their 
lives for truth and freedom to worship God. 

3. It was furthermore of the first importance that these 
pilgrims and exiles, from beyond the seas, brought with 
them a very true conception of the nature and worth of 
right education. Their scientific curriculum may not have 
been so extensive and pretentious as that in which we glory 
to-day, "Darwinism," ''survival of the fittest," "evolu- 
tion," "molecules," and ""protoplasm" and "the physical 
basis of life," had not then loomed up into such clearly 
defined proportions as they have since done. And the ven- 
erable anthropoid monkey had not yet been introduced into 
good society as the noble progenitor of a degenerated off- 
spring. But notwithstanding these melancholy defects in their 
early education, our fathers knew something of their Bibles, 
and they valued it sufficiently to teach it to their children 
as an essential element in a thorough course of mental train- 
ing. Their sons and daughters were taught the importance 
of worshiping God and of "keeping His commandments." 
The silly aff'ectation by which the parents of this modern 
day seek to screen themselves from the keen thrusts of a 
guilty, reproaching conscience for neglecting the religious 
education of their children, saying that the child must be 
left to exercise its own judgment and choice, unbiased by 



44 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

parental influence, is a cunning trick of the old adversary, 
the wily serpent, who loves nothing so well as to fold his 
slimy coils upon the family hearthstone, and to pollute with 
his presence the family altar. By this device he reaps yearly 
a bountiful harvest of priggish free-thinkers, and no-thinkers, 
and upstart fledglings, who think nothing so smart as a 
foppish pretension to a driveling skepticism which can giggle 
and nothing more, when the solemn realities of God, of 
death and of eternity are mentioned ; and he reaps it from 
the harvest-field of the church. Far be the day removed 
from us and from our land when the Bible shall be excluded 
from our schools. Cursed be the genius of an education 
which leaves the heart ungarnished and the moral nature, 
the ''inward part," the ''hidden part," to become a garden 
of weeds. It becomes a Christian people to pay a worthy 
tribute to the old parochial school system, wherein the Word 
of God was a recognized text-book, and the rule and 
standard of conduct. The early settlers of this country 
were very anxious to bring the blessings of their school 
within easy reach of their children. In every little com- 
munity the school-house and the fort were established near 
together, and were the two points of chief concern next to 
the church itself. 

A mournful interest gathers around the memory of that 
good man, Enoch Brown, whose sad death the men of this 
generation has wisely and justly determined to enshrine in 
the hearts of their children forever. " Honor to whom honor 
is due." Washington is held in the affections of a grateful 
nation. Our great heroes of war, our statesmen, our scholars 
and scientists are horored by the nation, by the nations. 
Shall we allow this noble man, who fell bravely at the humble 
post of his duty, to sink under the waves of oblivion ! Let 
his name be made known, and his worth be written upon 
the shaft of the imperishable granite ! And let the princi- 
ples which he inculcated be magnified in the sight of our 
children, that they may learn to value truth and to exalt it 
in their lives. 

Of the few scholars who providentially survived the ter- 
rible massacre of the school of Enoch Brown, on the 26th 
of July, 1764, two especially were appointed to attain to the 



Address of Rev. F. M, \^oods. 45 

parentage of a great number of sons and daughters, who 
shall rise up *'to call them blessed." 

One of the little girls became in the course of years the 
mother of the large and distinguished family of the Cham- 
bers', * of the adjacent city which bears their name. Another 
of those little girls was Eleanor Chochrane, aged seven or 
eight years, who was kept at home from the school on that 
fatal day by her parents. On the 24th of May, 1779, she 
was united in marriage to Captain Joseph Junkin, a brave 
and distinguished soldier and officer of the Revolutionary 
war. In virtue of this union she became the mother of 
fourteen children, ten sons and four daughters. These in 
turn became the parents of numerous offspi:ing, which shows 
no alarming signs of becoming extinct at the present time. 

Their children of the second and third generations exhibit 
much of the same true Calvinistic courage and strength of 
character which marked the older type. 

We find in this family comforting evidence that our God 
is a covenant keeping God. Of the large family born to the 
pious Joseph Junkin and Eleanor Cochrane, two of the sons, 
George and David, became distinguished ministers of the 
Gospel, distinguished for learning and talent; but also for 
their holy zeal and consecration to the Master's work. Two 
of the daughters married ministers. Of the descendants in 
the next generation many became office-holders in the 
church. In all twenty or more of the children and grand- 
children of Joseph and Eleanor Junkin have become min- 
isters of the Gospel ; and probably thirty have been chosen 
to the office of Ruling Elder. And there are very few if 
any of the children who are not Christians. God signalizes 
Himself in remembering His mercy. 

A son of David X. Junkin, George, who lives in Virginia, 
is married to a great great granddaughter of Gen. Andre^v 
Lewis, whom I suppose to be the officer who commanded 
the Virginia troops which joined Col. Henry Bouquet, when 
he marched into Ohio to punish the Indians for this atro- 
cious massacre. 

Thus in the fifth generation on the one side, and in the 
third on the other, the blood of the Virginia Lewises and 

♦Seepage 71. 



46 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

of the Pennsylvania Cochranes unites in a family of eleven 
children, ten of whom are now living. 

Of the family of Dr. George Junkin, two sons are able 
ministers of the New Testament. One is a distinguished 
and successful lawyer in Philadelphia. One of his daughters, 
Eleanor, was the first wife of the great Confederate General, 
T. J. Jackson, better known by his sobriquet of '' Stonewall " 
Jackson. Another of his daughters, Mrs. Margaret J. Pres- 
ton, wife of Col. J. S. L. Preston, of Lexington, Va., is 
widely known by her sweet and thrilling touch of the poet's 
lyre, which has awakened an echo of rapture in so many 
hearts, bringing light to those that walk in darkness and 
gladness to those .bowed down with grief and sorrow. 

But among so many why select only a few, when all are 
worthy? Let us all together give thanks to God for '' His 
wonderful works to the children of men." After one hun- 
dred and twenty-one years, as our tardy memorial to the 
merits of well-nigh forgotten worth, we reverently unveil 
and dedicate this beautiful shaft, which shall ever serve to 
quicken our thoughts of the stirring times witnessed upon 
this classic spot. 



POEM OF JOHN M. COOPER. 
Enoch Brown. 
Looking down the long vista that brings to our view 
The face of this vale when her homesteads were new, 
We see through the haze of the far-reaching years 
A scene so pathetic it moves us to tears. 
On the slope of a hill, near the edge of a wood. 
With settlements scattered around it, there stood 
A little log school house, with plain battened door, 
And roof of lap shingles, and rough oaken floor. 
'Twas the height of the summer and Sol's golden tide 
Flowed in through a long row of glass in the side. 
While the air, as if weary from journeying far. 
Seemed scarcely to stir through the door wide ajar. 
Within sat the master, with hair white as snow. 
And eleven small children all ranged in a row. 
And their lessons they droned as their primers they thumbed, 
Till the little log house like a big bee-hive hummed. 

Both master and children were happy that mom. 

And had danger been hinted, would laughed it to scorn ; 



Poem of John M. Cooper, 47 

For the farmers were down in the mead making hay, 
And the lambs skipped each other like children at play ; 
And the kine, of their burden relieved by the maid, 
Chewed their cud with content in the orchard's green shade ; 
And the partridge piped clear in the stubble of grain. 
And the robin was blithe down the red cherry lane ; 
And the low voice of doves came with soft, soothing sound. 
From the forest that bounded the school-house around ; 
And the watch-dog lay dreaming, nor broke on his ear 
E'en a faint sound of warning that danger was near. 

The fair face of nature was bright with a smile. 
Yet devils, red devils, stole here all the while. 

The master had risen with bible in hand, 

God's message to read to his tender young band, 

When, sudden as wolves on the fold fast asleep, 

Three savages came through the door with a leap — 

Three red painted demons, with eyes wild aglare. 

Like tigers whose nostrils scent blood in the air — 

Three devils incarnate, with purpose as fell 

As if formed in the black rankling bosom of hell. 

The lion whose jungle bold hunters invade 

Can defend it with weapons that nature has made. 

But alas ! the good master who fell here that day 

Had no weapon defensive — he only could pray — 

And prayers to the bloodhound let loose on the trail, 

Though offered by angels, will nothing avail. 

With a stroke of the hatchet his gray head they clove. 

And deep in his bosom the dagger they drove ; 

And unmoved by their terror, the children they smote, 

Till life gave its last gasping throb in the throat. 

Then red-handed devils shot down yonder dell, 

Like hot hissing flames through the wide flues of hell. 

When the afternoon sun shone that sad, fateful day. 
Some one had occasion to wander this way. 
And struck by the silence, looked in at the door, 
And his heart froze with horror, for there on the floor 
Lay master and children, all covered with gore, 
As if through the roof there had fallen a rain 
Of mingled and horrible flesh, blood and brain. 
And there Archie McCullough, with face all red 
With the blood of his own poor bleeding head — 
He alone living — his playmates all dead — 
Was crawling around and calling the slain, 
And patting their faces — alas ! how vain — 
In his childlike effort to wake them again. 



48 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

The alarm being sounded, a youth on a steed 

Went spreading the news with the uttermost speed — 

No bit in the mouth nor a saddle on back, 

No curb but the halter quick loosed from the rack. 

The mettlesome steed seemed to understand 

The terrible errand they had in hand, 

And the swelling veins in his silken side, 

And the luminous glow of his nostrils wide, 

And the nervous spring of his arm and thigh, 

And the curve of his neck and the flash of his eye, 

As he haughtily tossed his foretop high. 

Seemed plainly to say he would do it or die. 

Then he swallowed the hill at a single bound. 
And startled the settlements far around 
With the rapid, resounding and furious pound 
Of his shodden hoof on the hard dry ground. 
As up winding road and through narrow lane, 
And out on the winding road again, 
And into the woods, where he shook the oak 
And frightened the deer with his thunder stroke. 
And over the clearing and down the ravine. 
Wherever the smoke of a cabin was seen, 
(Leaping the fences and leaping the bars 
As a comet would leap over moon and stars,) 
He carried his rider, M^ho, gasping for breath, 
Kept shouting his terrible message of death — 
Of master and children stark dead and still. 
In the little log school house on Guitner's hill. 
The cheek of the mother grew pallid with fear, 
And swooning she murmured " red devils are here^ 

Then the rake was let drop on the freshly cut hay, 
And the scythe left to rust in the swath where it lay. 
And the rifle was snatched from its place on the wall. 
And the shot-pouch was filled up with powder and ball. 
And the settlers went forth in hot search for the foe 
Who had brought on their households this burden of woe. 
But pursuit was in vain, and in sadness they turned 
To their desolate homes, where dim vigil lamps burned, 
And the mother sat mourning the child of her womb. 
As it slept the deep sleep that leads down to the tomb. 

Though long seem the hours whose seconds are grief, 
The space between death and interment is brief. 
And not long did the stricken mourn over their dead. 
Ere the loved ones were laid in their last earthly bed : 
First the master, with honor well due to his years ; 
Then the children around him, and over all tears : 



Address of Dr. William H. Egle. 49 

And the hearts of a multitude throbbed in their breast 
As the turf on their cold, silent bosoms was pressed. 
In sorrow, with weeping, they laid them away. 
And the bones of the martyrs are there to this day ; 
And so long as a star shall look down from the sky. 
May this stone stand to point out the place where they lie. 

Together they suffered, together they died, 

And together they buried them side by side ; 

And together they rose on angels' wings 

Where the music of harps with golden strings 

Greets the sinless souls that cross over the river 

To dwell in the Land of the Blessed forever. 

And the face of the Lord shone bright, and he smiled 

As he said in low, loving accents mild, 

" Suffer the children to come unto me. 

For of such must the kingdom of heaven be." 

And he ordered the angels to fashion a crown, 

Lined with velvet soft and with eider-down, 

To bedeck the bruised head of old Enoch Brown. 

Red devils can never break in and slay 

Where that good old master is resting to-day. 



ADDRESS OF DR. WM. H. EGLE,'^ 

OF HARRISBURG, PA, 

''Men of Antrim: Let us go backward one hundred 
and twenty-two years, to Anno Domini, One Thousand 
Seven Hundred and Sixty Three, The lilies of France had 
already given place to the cross of England, and thus ended, 
forever, the fond dream of the former — the establishment of 
a French empire in America. Founded in religious enthu- 
siasm, culminating in persecutions shocking to civilization, 
they attempted to cement and continue their power by en- 
dowing to the lateness of the hour, Dr. Egle only delivered part of the able 
address which he had prepared for the occasion, on " Pontiac and Bouquet," 
He had promised to revise the entire document for this publication, but a mul- 
tiplicity of other pressing duties prevented him from doing so. He has, however, 
revised, and somewhat enlarged the synopsis, published in the Valley Spirit, 
Aug. 5, 1885, which we furnish below. The Doctor felt that this was all that 
was really necessary, inasmuch as a large part of the ground traversed in his 
speech had alreadv been covered by the pamphlet on Col. Bouquet and His 
Campaigns," and by the proceedings of the Bouquet Celebration at Bushy Run, 
Aug. 6, 1883, which are now published in full, along with the ceremonies of the 
Enoch Brown Dedication. 



50 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

listing the brutality of the Aborigine, working cruelty and 
bloodshed, but as ever the case, resulting in the downfall of 
those inaugurating such horrors. The last of the French 
soldiers had returned to their homes, yet the resentments and 
bitter hatred they had ruthlessly kindled in the minds and 
hearts of the savages remained. The Indian of to-day is 
only a prototype of those of a century ago. They are just 
as perfidious and treacherous now as they were then — and 
it is only possible that by education and the power and 
grace of Christianity, that they may become loyal inhabi- 
tants of a great country. We are no admirers of the Indian 
character, and in all our researches into the history of 
America, find the same traits and the same brutal instincts, 
which to-day fire the savage breast of the perfidious 
Apache." The speaker continued on a further description 
of their character. 

Then taking up the theme of his address, ''Pontiac and 
Bouquet," he outlined the history of Col. Bouquet in his 
warfare against the savages, who so ruthlessly desolated the 
homes of the frontiersmen of that early period, and recounted 
the engagements had with them. After a vivid descrip- 
tion of the condition of the country and people in 
1 763-64, and the atrocities of the Indians, the orator said : 
''We now come to a dark transaction in the bloody annals 
of Border life, which we have especially assembled on this 
day and hour to recall. Located near this spot, in the sum- 
mer of July, 1764, was a small log building, in which a 
pious school-master, Enoch Brown, taught a group of happy 
little children. It was in harvest-time, on the 26th of July. 
While those in their teens were assisting in gathering the 
crops, the smaller ones only engaged in study. The lessons 
of the early forenoon had nearly all been recited, and the 
scholars and their faithful teacher and friend were anticipat- 
ing a recess from study. None can imagine the consterna- 
tion and horror pictured on the faces of the late joyful group 
when rushing through the opened door came a band of 
brutal Indians. How and whence they came, unperceived 
by the settlers, and by chance, upon this gronp of children 
no one relates. It was a moment of awful suspense, as the 
'Ugh' of the savages awoke the quiet of that summer's day. 



I 



Address of Dr. William H. Egle. 51 

Immediately the brave-hearted school-master, fully reahzing 
the situation and the peril of the hour, bade the monsters 
take his life, but spare the innocent children, who were 
crouching in fear before the angry and infuriated red demons 
of the forest. There was no pity or mercy in that ruthless 
horde. At once the work of butchering began, and in less 
time than it can be related, the bloody deed was consum- 
mated. Hurriedly securing the scalps of teacher and schol- 
ars, as trophies of a victory, the inhuman monsters with 
hellish satisfaction, retraced their steps and were lost in the 
wilderness beyond." 

"Why tarry the children? was the inquiry of the anxious 
frontier mother, as she looked out from her rude home to- 
wards the path to the school-house. Presently, anxiety gave 
way to alarm, and the male members of the family were sent 
out to learn the cause of their absence. How sad the dis- 
covery ! It was indeed ' Holy Innocents' Day ' in this new 
land of ours, and one which you, my friends, have seen 
fit to remember. And yet, I think I hear some say, what of 
this dark and bloody deed so disgraceful to humanity, so 
horrifying to all the finer feelings of our nature, — why com- 
memorate, why not allow oblivion to cast an eternal shadow 
over the transaction ? My friends, if it was only the atro- 
cious butchery of that day, we might well cover over and 
hide it from earthly annals forever. But in that sanguinary 
hour there were the grand and ennobling characteristics of 
Christian manhood and glory shining forth ; which have 
come down to us through all the cathedral aisles of time, 
and prompted us to erect in this place this memorial. The 
deed perpetrated one hundred and twenty-one years ago, is 
a land-mark in the history of this locality, and this stone 
will be a constant reminder of the sufferings endured by 
your ancestors, who indeed made the wilderness to blos- 
som as the rose, and founded through many trials and 
great sufferings, homes you now enjoy in peace and plenty. 
That heroic teacher, with the Bible in his hand imploring 
his brutal murderers to take his life and spare the innocent 
ones around him, eminently deserves the voiced recognition 
here given. The band of children, slaughtered through 
savage hate, most of whose names are unknown to us, have 



52 Enoch Brown Memorial. 

a sacred memory which you do well to record. Their lives 
were sacrificed not without some grand purpose. It touched, 
at least, the hearts of the Quaker Assembly, who at once 
determined to place the country in defence. It nerved the 
souls of the settlers to defend their homes and wipe the 
heathen from the land. And, citizens of Antrim and this 
highly favored locality, you have done a good thing in the 
erection of this memorial. 

Dr. Egle took up the campaign of Bouquet after the mas- 
sacre here and alluded with words of praise to the Findlays 
and Dixons, the Maclays and^McDowells, the Armstrongs 
and Chambers's, the Jacks and Johnstons and Potters who 
accompanied him. Referring to a later period he said : 
** Among the hundreds of Scotch-Irish who served in the 
war of the Revolution from the Antrim, Letterkenny and 
Lurgan of old not one turned Tory. Born among priva- 
tion and tyranny, in the sternness of integrity and heartfelt 
piety, with the Bible in one hand and the trusty rifle in the 
other, let us give the meed of praise to the early settlers of 
this locality, whose crowning excellence was their devotion 
to religion and their unflinching duty to God and man. ' ' 

After tracing Bouquet's course in the west with his army, 
partly made up of the men just described, narrating the 
recapitulation of the Indians and the ultimate success of the 
brave commander, Dr. Egle concluded : '' Thus ended the 
power of the Western Indians, and the war inaugurated by 
Pontiac and Kyasutha closed. The peace which ensued 
lasted for a period of ten years, and confidence and security 
were given to the pioneers of the west. The frontiers were 
removed from this locality west of the Alleghenies, and 
never more did the foot of the hostile savage tread this 
beautiful valley. It was during this period of quietude that 
emigration to the valley of the Ohio's headwaters was per- 
manently commenced — when the foundations were laid of 
great and powerful States now holding a controlling influ- 
ence in the American nation. To Col. Henry Bouquet, the 
gallent Swiss officer, more than to any other who served in 
the French and Indian war, are we indebted for much of 
the prosperity which followed. He was incomparably a 
strong man — firm and decided as an officer and intrepid 



Address of Dr. Wm. H. Egle 53 

as a soldier. His remains rest in an unknown grave on the 
Florida coast, but his name and fame are inseparably con- 
nected with the history of our State. He did signal service 
in his day and generation, and the influence of his heroic 
deeds has thrilled unumbered hearts through the years which 
have intervened." 

''Pontiac and Bouquet ! The first the personification of 
a savage Napoleon, brutal, inhuman and treacherous — mur- 
der and lust glaring his eye-balls — pollution and baseness in 
all his acts. The latter — a man standing out grand and 
glorious, fulfilling life's noble destiny, magnanimous as he 
was brave, a soldier by education, but an upright citizen 
and Christian gentleman. The former not the ideal repre- 
sentative of his race, but the true, with all the evil of 
human nature; the latter with the God-like attributes of 
mankind." 

*^Men of Antrim, I am done. With the work you have 
this day completed do not imagine that your duties of life 
are finished. In commemorating the virtues of the school- 
master of the long ago you should not forget the glorious 
principles which underlie all noble actions. Instil into the 
minds of your children a reverence for the good, by precept 
as well as by example. If the pious teacher of one hundred 
and twenty-one years ago deserves this commemorative 
stone, let the remembrance of the events of that era fre- 
quently cause you to reflect upon the blessings you enjoy 
and thank God that you live in prosperous peace. ' ' 






APPENDIX. 






r^^ CHRISTIAN NAME OF SCHOOLMASTER BROWN. 

Considerable ado was made last summer by one of the 
Chambersburg papers over a supposed mistake in the name 
of the martyred schoolmaster. It was alleged, on the pre- 
tended authority of Dr. Egle, that his name was Hugh in- 
stead of Enoch. In a conversation with the writer on the 
evening of Dedication Day, in presence af Poet Cooper, 
Dr. Egle emphatically remarked that he never had author- 
ized such statements. Said he, '* I never said that the school- 
master's name was Hugh or that it was not Enoch. In my 
speech to-day I repeatedly called him Enoch. We must 
take tradition where we have no history that positively con- 
tradicts it. I spent several days in Carlisle recently exam- 
ining the old lists of Cumberland county taxables, &c., but 
found no mention of either Enoch or Hugh Brown among 
them." General David Detrich and his aged sister, Mrs. 
Diehl, also Mrs. Scott, besides other old citizens, affirm that 
Betty Hopkins always called the schoolmaster Enoch ; Mrs. 
Scott heard her call him Enoch nearly eighty years ago. 
Capt. C. F. Bonner is a great grandson of the massacred 
teacher, and says all the family traditions gave him the name 
''Enoch." Ancient papers which would doubtless have 
made this matter perfectly clear were thoughtlessly de- 
stroyed many years ago. 

Andrew N. Rankin, Esq., of Jamaica, N. Y., states that 
his grandmother's maiden name was Brown and that her 
father was a cousin of the murdered schoolmaster. She had 
often told him the story of the massacre and had not only 
called the master Enoch, but had given the reason why he was 
originally named Enoch. He was born in Ireland, where 
thirteen is considered unlucky. Being the thirteenth child 
in his father's family his parents sought to ward off bad luck 
by naming the child Enoch, after the first man ''who was 
translated without tasting death." See Gen. 5, 24. 'Squire 



56 Enoch Brown Memorial — Appendix. 

Rankin (the father of A. N.) was a leading spirit in the 
work of exhuming the remains of the teacher and scholars, 
August 4, 1843. He also furnished, along with George W. 
Ziegler, Esq., the detailed account of the same, which was 
afterwards published by I. D. Rupp in the county history 
and inserted from time to time in the county papers. The 
Irish device to ward off bad luck from Enoch Brown seems 
not to have been very successful, and yet, humanely speaking, 
we can say, in the light of present surroundings, that there 
was good luck in the bad luck. Providence overruled the 
massacre, we believe, to secure from the Provincial govern- 
ment for Bouquet the reinforcements for which he vainly 
pleaded the year before. And but for this massacre and the 
self-sacrificing spirit shown in that fiery ordeal, history would 
know nothing of Enoch Brown, the martyred schoolmaster, 
and no monument would perpetuate his memory. 



ENOCH BR WN POE TR Y. 
The following is the full text of the poem, the last two 
verses of which form the inscription on the south side of 
the monument : 

A Poem — In Memoriam.* 
With anguish sore and bitter woe, 

The hearts of Konoshickf are wrung 
Alas ! the cruel Indian foe 

Has slain the tender and the young. 

As Rachel wept in Judah's land 

O'er infants slain by tyrant king, 
So Antrim wails her martyr band, 

Her homes with lamentations ring. 

As heroes fall, at duty's post, 

So fell the master and his school, 
A sacrifice, a holocaust, 

To border life and Quaker rule. 

The place is holy where they died, 

In Christian faith and childhood pure, 

And where they laid them side by side, 
In common grave and sepulture. 

*By a friend of the monument, February 10, 1885. 
tOne of the old ways of spelling Conococheague. 



The Quaker Poet. 5 7 

And ye, who now in safety dwell, 

In Cumberland's enchanting vale, 
Revere the spot and mark it well, 

Where long was heard the mother's wail. 

For not in vain the martyrs die. 

Their death brings life to pioneers, 
Who gain the burden of their cry. 

Relief denied in former years. 

Bouquet has sought the tiger's lair 

With trusty lion-hearted men ; 
Kind Heaven grants the settlers' prayer. 

The Dove of Peace returns again — 

The tomahawk and scalping knife. 

Long red with Anglo Saxon gore. 
The symbols dire of savage strife. 

Are seen on Antrim's hills no more. 

The ground is holy where they fell 

And where their mingled ashes lie. 
Ye Christian people mark it well 

With granite column strong and high. 

And cherish well, forevermore, 

The storied wealth of early years. 
The sacred legacies of yore. 

The toils and trials of pioneers. 



THE QUAKER POET. 

While Prof. J. Fraise Richard was gathering data for the 
history of Franklin county, he wrote a letter to John G. 
Whittier, the New England poet, requesting him to write a 
poem on the massacre of Enoch Brown and the school chil- 
dren. The following letter was received by Mr. Richard 
in reply, viz: 

Oak Knoll, Danvers, Mass., ) 
3d month 19, 1886. j 

Dear Friend : I am glad to know that the people of Franklin 
county have erected a monument to the memory of the noble. Christian 

C* 



58 Enoch Brown Memorial — Appendix. 

schoolmaster and his slain children, and that the history of the county 
is to be written by thyself. In my state of health I do not feel equal to 
the exciting effort of writing a poem on so sad a theme. But I thank 
thee for thy letter and enclosed circulars, and am truly thy friend, 

John G. Whittier. 



HON. HORATIO SEYMOUR ON THE MONUMENT. 

In December, 1881, the Greencastle Press published a 
letter from Hon. Horatio Seymour to Rev. Cyrus Cort, 
stating that "it is time that our people are made acquainted 
with our obligations to the German and Holland lineages," 
and thanking him for an article on Baron Steuben, which 
Rev. Cort had furnished the Reformed Church Messenger 
about the time of the Yorktown Centennial Celebration. 
Mr. Seymour had been chiefly instrumental in having an 
invitation sent to the Steubens of Germany, by the Ameri- 
can Government, who he thought deserved it as well as the 
Lafayettes of France, to participate in that centennial cele- 
bration. Baron Steuben was the efficient drill-master and 
Inspector General of the Revolutionary Army at Valley 
Forge and vastly improved its discipline and effectiveness. 
He managed the siege and commanded a division in the 
trenches which was about to storm the camp of Cornwallis 
at the very hour that the flag of surrender was hung out. 
After the war he was for some years an elder in the Reformed 
church in Nassau street. New York city, in which church a 
memorial tablet was placed by his aide. General North, after 
the Baron's death. Mr. Seymonr recently celebrated his 
75th birthday and at the same time his Golden Wedding. 
In connection with this event Rev. Cort sent him copies of 
several poems written a few months ago in honor of similar 
events celebrated by his uncles, Simon Cort at Denver, Col., 
and Daniel Cort at Zwingli, Iowa, and their wives. He 
enclosed at the same time one of the Enoch Brown circulars. 
Mr. Seymour promptly acknowledged the receipt of these 
documents in an autograph letter to Rev. Cort, which we 
believe will be of special interest now that the distinguished 



Report of Treasurer. 59 

Statesman has passed away along with his beloved wife, 
under very pathetic circumstances. 

Utica, N. Y., July 9, 1885. 

My Dear Sir. — I am under obligations to you for sending me 
copies of your verses written on the Fiftieth anniversaries of the marriages 
of your kinsfolk, Mr, and Mrs. Simon Cort, and Mr. and Mrs. Daniel 
Cort. They are very happily conceived and expressed. I am also in- 
terested in the circular with regard to the Enoch Brown Monument. I 
have given some time and attention to the erection of monuments in 
commemoration of events. Such monuments have done much to teach 
about the past and to instruct with regard to duties of life and the vir- 
tues of patriotism, &c. We feel as we look upon them that the dead 
speak to us. A number of such monuments were put up in this section 
about the time of our national centennial year. They have done much 
to instruct and improve our citizens. I trust the effort to put up the 
Enoch Brown Monument was successful. Again thanking you for send- 
ing me the verses and the circular about the monument, I am 
Respectfully yours, 

Horatio Seymour. 

To the Rev. Cyrus Cort. 
At the earnest entreaty of some of my much respected friends, I have added to the former discourse a relation of such things as were credibly reported at a Plymouth, in New England, in September last past, concerning the present estate of Virginia.  And because men may doubt how we should have intelligence of their affairs, being we are so far distant, I will therefore satisfy the doubtful therein.  Captain Francis West being in New England about the latter end of May past, sailed from thence to Virginia, and returned in August.  In September the same ship and company being discharged by him at Damarin's Cove, came to New Plymouth, where, upon our earnest inquiry after the state of Virginia since that bloodly slaughter committed by the Indians upon our friends and countrymen, the whole ship's company agreed in this, viz. that upon all occasions they chased the Indians to and fro, insomuch as they sued daily unto the English for peace, who for the present would not admit of any; that Sir George Early, etc. was at their present employed upon service against them; that amongst many other, Opachancano, the chief emperor, was supposed to be slain; his son also was killed at the same time.  And though, by reason of these forenamed broils in the fore part of the year, the English had undergone great want of food, yet, through God's mercy, there never was more show of plenty, having as much and as good corn on the ground as ever they had.  Neither was the hopes of their tobacco crop inferior to that of their corn; so that the planters were never more full of encouragement; which I pray God long to continue, and so to direct both them and us, as his glory may be the principal aim and end of all our actions, and that for his mercy's sake.  Amen. 
 The Good Ship called the Fortune, which in the Month of November 1621 (blessed be God) brought us a new supply of 35 persons, was not long departed our Coast, ere the Great people of Narragansett, which are reported to be many thousands strong, began to breath forth many threats against us, notwithstanding their desired and obtained peace with us in the foregoing summer. Insomuch as the common talk of our neighbor Indians on all sides was of the preparation they made to come against us. In reason a man would think they should have now more cause to fear us than before our supply came: but though none of them were present, yet understanding by others that they neither brought Arms nor other provisions with them, but wholly relied on us, it occasioned them to sleight and brave us with so many threats as they did. At length came one of them to us, who was sent by Conanacus their chief Sachem or King, accompanied with one Tokamahamon, a friendly Indian. This messenger inquired for Tisquantum our Interpreter, who not being at home seemed rather to be glad than sorry, and leaving for him a bundle of new arrows lapped in a rattle Snakes skin, desired to depart with all expedition. But our Governors not knowing what to make of this strange carriage, and comparing it with that we had formerly heard, committed him to the custody of Captain .Standish, hoping now to know some certainty of that we so often heard, either by his own relation to us, or to Tisquantum at his return, desiring my self, having special familiarity with the other fore-named Indian, to see if I could learn any thing From him, whose answer was sparingly to this effect; that he could not certainly tell, but thought they were enemies to us.

That night Captain Standish gave me and another charge of him, and gave us order to use him kindly, and that he should not want any thing he desired, and to take all occasions to talk and inquire of the reasons of those reports we heard, and withal to signify that upon his true relation he should be set of his owne freedom. At first fear so possessed him, that he could scarce say anything: but in the end became more familiar, and told us that the messenger which his Master sent in Summer to treat of peace, at his return persuaded him rather to war; and to the end he might provoke him hereunto, (as appeared to him by our reports) detained many of the things were sent him by our Governor, scorning the meanness of them both in respect of what himself had formerly sent, and also of the greatness of his own person; so that he much blamed the former Messenger, saying, that upon the knowledge of his false carriage, it would cost him his life; but assured us that upon his relation of our speech then with him to his Master, he would be friends with us. Of this we informed the Governor and his Assistant, and Captain Standish, who after consultation considered him howsoever but in the state of a messenger, and it being as well against the Law of Arms amongst them as us in Europe, to lay violent hands on any such, set him at liberty, the Governor giving him order to certify his Master that he had heard of his large and many threatenings, at which he was much offended, daring him in those respects to the utmost, if he would not be reconciled to live peaceably as other his neighbors; manifesting withal (as ever) his desire of peace; but his fearless resolution, if he could not so live amongst them. After which he caused meat to be offered him, but he refused to eat, making all speed to return, and giving many thanks for his liberty. But requesting the other Indian again to return, the weather being violent, he used many words to persuade him to stay longer, but could not. Whereupon he left him, and said he was with his friends, and would not take a journey in such extremity.

After this when Tisquantum returned, and the arrows were delivered, and the manner of the messengers carriage related, he signified to the Governor, that to send the rattle Snakes skin in that manner, imported enmity, and that it was no better than a challenge. Hereupon after some deliberation, the Governor stuffed the skin with powder and shot, and sent it back returning no less defiance to Conanacus, assuring him if he had shipping now present thereby to send his men to Narragansett (the place of his abode) they should not need to come so far by land to us: yet withal strewing that they should never come unwelcome or unlooked for. This message was sent by an Indian, and delivered in such sort, as it was no small terror to this savage King, insomuch as he would not once touch the powder and shot, or suffer it to stay in his house or Country. Whereupon the Messenger refusing it, another took it up, and having been posted from place to place a long time, at length came back who again.

In the mean time, knowing our own weakness, notwithstanding our high words and lofty looks towards them, and still lying open to all casualty, having as yet (under God) no other defense than our Arms, we thought it most needful to impale our Town, which with all expedition we accomplished in the month of February and some few days, taking in the top of the Hill under which our Town is seated, making four bulwarks or jetties without the ordinary circuit of the pale, from whence we could defend the whole Town: In three whereof are gates, and the fourth in time to be. This being done, Captain Standish divided our strength into four squadrons or companies, appointing whom he thought most fit to have command of each; And at a general Muster or Training, appointed each his place, gave each his Company, giving them charge upon every alarm to resort to their Leaders to their appointed place, and in his absence, to be commanded and directed by them. That done according to his order, each drew his Company to his appointed place for defense, and there together discharged their muskets. After which they brought their new Commanders to their houses, where again they graced them with their shot, and so departed.

Fearing also lest the enemy at any time should take any advantage by firing our houses, Captain Standish appointed a certain Company, that whensoever they saw or heard fire to be cried in the Town, should only betake themselves to their Arms, and should enclose the house or place so endangered, and stand aloof on their guard, with their backs towards the fire, to prevent treachery, if any were in that kind intended. If the fire were in any of the houses of this guard, they were then freed from it, but not otherwise, without special command.

Long before this time we promised the people of Massachusetts in the beginning of March to come unto them, and trade for their Furs, which being then come, we began to make preparation for that voyage. In the meantime, an Indian called Hobomok, who still lived in the Town, told us, that he feared the Massachusetts or Massachuseucks (for they so called the people of that place) were joined in confederacy with the Nanohigganneucks, or people of Narragansett, and that they therefore would take this opportunity to cut off Captain Standish and his company abroad: but howsoever in the mean time, it was to be feared that the Narragansetts would assault the Town at home, giving many reasons for his jealousy, as also that Tisquantum was in the confederacy, who we should find would use many persuasions to draw us from our shallops to the Indians houses for their better advantage. To confirm this his jealousy he told us of many secret passages that passed between him and others, having their meetings ordinarily abroad in the woods: but if at home howsoever he was excluded from their secrecy, saying it was the manner of the Indians when they meant plainly to deal openly: but in this his practice there was no show of honesty.

Hereupon the Governor, together with his Assistant and Captain Standish, called together such, as by them were thought most meet for advice in so weighty a business, who after consideration hereof came to this resolution; That as hitherto upon all occasions between them and us, we had ever manifested undaunted courage and resolution, so it would not now stand with our safety to mew up our selves in our new-enclosed town, partly because our Store was almost empty, and therefore must seek out for our daily food, without which we could not long subsist; but especially for that thereby they would see us dismayed, and be encouraged to prosecute their malicious purposes; with more eagerness than ever they intended: whereas on the contrary, by the blessing of God, our fearless carriage might be a means to discourage and weaken their proceedings. And therefore thought best to proceed in our trading voyage, making this use of that we heard, to go the better provided, and use the more carefulness both at home and abroad, leaving the event to the disposing of the Almighty, whose providence as it had hitherto been over us for good, so we had now no cause (save our sins) to despair of his mercy in our preservation and continuance, where we desired rather to be instruments of good to the Heathens about us, than to give them the least measure of just offense.

All things being now in readiness, the forenamed Captain with ten men, accompanied with Tisquantum' and Hobomok, set forwards for the Massachusetts: but we had no sooner turned the point of the harbor called the Gurnets nose (where being becalmed we let fall our grapnel, to set things to rights, and prepare to row) but there came an Indian of Tisquantum's family, running to certain of our people that were from home with all eagerness, having his face wounded, and the blood still fresh on the same, calling to them to repair home, oft looking behind him, as if some others had him in chase, saying that at Nemasket (a town some fifteen miles from us) there were many of the Narragansetts, Massasoit our supposed friend, and Corbitant our feared enemy, with many others, with a resolution to take advantage on the present opportunity, to assault the town in the Captains absence, affirming that he received the wound in his face for speaking in our behalf, and by flight escaped, looking oft backward, as if he suspected them to be at hand. This he affirmed again to the Governor, whereupon he gave command that three piece of Ordnance should be made ready and discharged, to the end that if we were not out of hearing, we might return thereat. Which we no sooner heard, but we repaired homeward with all convenient speed, arming our selves, and making all in readiness to fight. When we entered the harbor, we saw the Town likewise on their guard, whither we hasted with all convenient speed. The news being made known unto us, Hobomok said flatly that it was false, assuring us of Massasoit's faithfulness; howsoever he presumed he would never have undertaken any such act without his privity, himself being a Pinse, that is, one of his chiefest champions or men of valor, it being the manner amongst them not to undertake such enterprises without the advice and furtherance of men of that rank. To this the Governor answered, he should be sorry that any just and necessary occasions of war should arise between him and any the Savages, but especially Massasoit, not that he feared him more than the rest, but because his love more exceeded towards him than any. Whereunto Hobomok replied; There was no cause wherefore he should distrust him, and therefore should doe well to continue his affections.

But to the end things might be made more manifest, the Governor caused Hobomok to send his wife with all privacy to Pokanoket the chief place of Massasoit's residence, (pretending other occasions) there to inform herself, and so us, of the right state of things. When she came thither, and saw all things quiet, and that no such matter was or had been intended, told Massasoit what had happened at Plymouth, (by them called Patuxet) which when he understood, he was much offended at the carriage of Tisquantum, returning many thanks to the Governor for his good thoughts of him; and assuring him that according to their first Articles of peace, he would send word and give warning when any such business was towards.

Thus by degrees we began to discover Tisquantum, whose ends were only to make himself great in the eyes of this Country-men, by means of his nearness and favor with us, not caring who fell so he stood. In the general, his course was to persuade them he could lead us to peace or war at his pleasure, and would oft threaten the Indians, sending them word in a private manner, we were intended shortly to kill them, that thereby he might get gifts to himself to work their peace, insomuch as they had him in greater esteem than many of their Sachems; yea they themselves sought to him, who promised them peace in respect of us; yea and protection also, so as they would resort to him. So that whereas divers were wont to relic on Massasoit for protection, and resort to his abode, now they began to leave him, and seek after Tisquantum. Now though he could not make good these his large promises, especially because of the continued peace between Massasoit and us, he therefore raised this false alarm, hoping whilest things were hot in the heat of blood, to provoke us to march into his Country against him, whereby he hoped to kindle such a flame as would not easily be quenched, and hoping if that block were once removed, there were no other between him and honor; which he loved as his life, and preferred before his peace. For these and the like abuses, the Governor sharply reproved him, yet was he so necessary and profitable an instrument, as at that time we could not miss him. But when we understood his dealings, we certified all the Indians of our ignorance and innocence therein, assuring them till they begun with us, they should have no cause to fear. And if any hereafter should raise any such reports, they should punish them as liars and seekers of their and our disturbance, which gave the Indians good satisfaction on all sides.

After this we proceeded in our voyage to the Massachusetts, where we had good store of Trade, and (blessed be God) returned in safety, though driven from before our Town in great danger and extremity of weather.

At our return, we found Massasoit at the Plantation, who made his seeming just Apology for all former matters of accusation, being much offended and enraged against Tisquantum, whom the Governor pacified as much as he could for the present. But not long after his departure, he sent a messenger to the Governor, entreating him to give way to the death of Tisquantum, who had so much abused him. But the Governor answered; Although he had deserved to die both in respect of him and us; yet for our sakes he desired he would spare him, and the rather because without him he knew not well how to Understand himself, or any other the Indians. With this answer the messenger returned, but came again not long after, accompanied with divers others, demanding him from Massasoit their Master, as being one of his subjects, whom by our first Articles of peace we could not retain: yet because he would not willingly doe it without the Governors approbation, offered him many Beaver's skins for his consent thereto, saying, that according to their manner, their Sachem had sent his own knife, and them therewith, to cut off his head and hands, and bring them to him. To which the Governor answered; Yet was not the manner of the English to sell mens' lives at a price, but when they had deserved justly to die, to give them their reward, and therefore refused their Beavers as a gift: but sent for Tisquantum, who though he knew their intent, yet offered not to fly, but came and accused Hobomok as the author and worker of his overthrow; yielding himself to the Governor to be sent or not according as he thought meet. But at the instant, when our Governor was ready to deliver him into the hands of his Executioners, a Boat was scene at Sea to cross before our Town, and fall behind a head-land not far off: whereupon, having heard many rumors of the French, and not knowing whether there were any combination between the Savages and them, the Governor told the Indians, he would first know what Boat that was ere he would deliver him into their custody. But being mad with rage, and impatient at delay, they departed in great heat.

Here let me not omit one notable (though wicked) practice of this Tisquantum, who to the end he might possess his Countrymen with the greater fear of us, and so consequently of himself, told them we had the plague buried in our storehouse, which at our pleasure we could send forth to what place or people we would, and destroy them therewith, though we stirred not from home. Being upon the fore-named brabbles sent for by the Governor to this place, where Hobomok was and some other of us, the ground being broke in the midst of the house, (hereunder certain barrels of powder were buried, though unknown to him) Hobomok asked him what it meant? To whom he readily answered; That was the place wherein the plague was buried, whereof he formerly told him and others. After this Hobomok asked one of our people, whether such a thing were, and whether we had such command of it ? Who answered no; But the God of the English had it in store, and could send it at his pleasure to the instruction of his and our enemies.

This was, as I take it, about the end of May 1622. At which time our store of victuals was wholly spent, having lived long before with a bare and short allowance: The reason was, that supply of men before mentioned, which came so unprovided, not landing so much as a barrel of bread or meal for their whole company, but contrariwise received from us for their ships store homeward. Neither were the setters forth thereof altogether to be blamed therein, but rather certain amongst our selves, who were too prodigal in their writing and reporting of that plenty we enjoyed. But that I may return.

This Boat proved to be a Shallop that belonged to a fishing ship, called the Sparrow, set forth by Master Thomas Weston, late Merchant and Citizen of London, which brought six or seven passengers at his charge, that should before have been landed at our Plantation, who also brought no more provision for the present than served the Boats gang for their return to the ship, which made her voyage at a place called Damarins Cove near Munhiggen some forty leagues from us North-eastward; about which place there fished above thirty sail of ships, and whither my self was employed by our Governor, with orders to take up such victuals as the ships could spare, where I found kind entertainment and good respect, with a willingness to supply our wants: But being not able to spare that quantity I required, by reason of the necessity of some amongst themselves, whom they supplied before my coming, would not take any Bills for the same, but did what they could freely, wishing their store had been such as they might in greater measure have expressed their own love, and supplied our necessities, for which they sorrowed, provoking one another to the utmost of their abilities: which although it were not much amongst so many people as were at the Plantation, yet through the provident and discreet care of the Governors, recovered and preserved strength till our own crop on the I ground was ready.

Having dispatched there, I returned home with all speed convenient, where I found the state of the Colony much weaker than when I left it: for till now we were never without some bread, the want whereof much abated the strength and flesh of some, and swelled others. But here it may be said, if the Country abound with Fish and Fowl in such measure as is reported, how could men undergo such measure of hardness, except through their own negligence? I answer; Every thing must be expected in its proper season. No man, as one saith, will go into an Orchard in the Winter to gather Cherries: so he that looks for Fowl there in the Summer, will be deceived in his expectation. The time they continue in plenty with us, is from the beginning of October to the end of March: but these extremities befell us in May and June. I confess that as the Fowl decrease, so Fish increase. And indeed their exceeding abundance was great cause of increasing our wants. For though our Bay and Creeks were full of Bass, and other fish, yet for want of fit and strong seines, and other netting, they for the most part brake through and carried all away before them. And though the Sea were full of Cod, yet we had neither tackling nor hawsers for our Shallops. And indeed had we not been in a place where divers sorts of shell-fish are that may be taken with the hand, we must have perished, unless God had raised some unknown or extraordinary means for our preservation.

In the time of these straits (indeed before my going to Monhiggan) the Indians began again to cast forth many insulting speeches, glorying in our weakness, and giving out how easy it would be ere long to cut us off. Now also Massasoit seemed to frown on us, and neither came or sent to us as formerly. These things occasioned further thoughts of Fortification: And whereas we have a Hill called the Mount, enclose within our pale, under which our Town is seated, we resolved to erect a Fort thereon, from whence a few might easily secure the Town from any assault the Indians can make, whilest the rest might be employed as occasion served. This work was begun with great eagerness, and with the approbation of all men, hoping that this being once finished, and a continual guard there kept, it would utterly discourage the Savages from having any hopes or thoughts of rising against us. And though it took the greatest part of our strength from dressing our come, yet (life being continued) we hoped God would raise some means in stead thereof for our further preservation. 
 In the end of June, or beginning of July, came into our harbor two Ships of Master Weston's aforesaid, the one called the Charity, the other the Swan, having in them some fifty or sixty men sent over at his own charge to plant for him. These we received into our Town, affording them whatsoever courtesy our mean condition could afford. There the Charity, being the bigger ship, left them, having many passengers which she was to land in Virginia. In the mean time, the body of them refreshed themselves at Plymouth, whilest some most fit sought out a place for them. That little store of come we had, was exceedingly wasted by the unjust and dishonest walking of these strangers, who though they would sometimes seem to help us in our labor about our come, yet spared not day and night to steal the same, it being then eatable, and pleasant to taste, though green and unprofitable. And though they received much kindness, set light both by it and us; not sparing to requite the love we showed them, with secret backbitings, revilings, etc. the chief of them being forestalled and made against us, before they came, as after appeared: Nevertheless for their Masters sake, who formerly had deserved well from us. We continued to doe them whatsoever good or furtherance we could, attributing these things to the want of conscience and discretion, expecting each day, when God in his providence would disburden us of them, sorrowing that their Over-seers were not of more ability and fitness for their places and much fearing what would be the issue of such raw and unconscionable beginnings.

At length their Coasters returned, having found in their judgment a place fit for plantation, within the Bay of the Massachusetts, at a place called by the Indians Wessugussett. To which place the body of them went with all convenient speed, leaving still with us such as were sick and lame, by the Governors permission, though on their parts undeserved, whom, our Surgeon by the help of God recovered gratis for them, and they fetched home, as occasion served.

They had not been long from us, ere the Indians filled our ears with clamors against them, for stealing their come, and other abuses conceived by them. At which we grieved the more, because the same men, in mine own hearing, had been earnest in persuading Captain Standish, before their coming to solicit our Governor to send some of his men to plant by them, alleging many reasons how it might be commodious for us. But we knew no means to redress those abuses, save reproofs, and advising them to better walking, as occasion served.

In the end of August came other two ships into our harbor, the one (as I take it) was called the Discovery, Captain Jones having the command thereof, the other was that ship of Mr. Weston's called the Sparrow, which had now made her voyage of fish, and was consorted with the other, being both bound for Virginia. of Captain Jones we furnished our selves of such. provisions as we most needed, and he could best spare, who as he used us kindly, so made us pay largely for the things we had. And had not the Almighty, in his All-ordering Providence, directed him to us, it would have gone worse with us, than ever it had been, or after was: for, as we had now but small store of come for the year following: so for want of supply, we were worn out of all manner of trucking stuff, not having any means left to help our selves by trade; but, through Gods good mercy towards us, he had wherewith, and did supply our wants on that kind competently.

In the end of September, or beginning of October, Mr. Weston's biggest ship called the Charity, returned for England, and left their Colony sufficiently victualed, as some of most credit amongst them reported. The lesser, called the Swan, remained with his Colony for their further help. At which time they desired to join in partnership with us to trade for come; to which our Governor and his Assistant agreed upon such equal conditions, as were drawn and confirmed between them and us. The chief places aimed at were to the Southward of Cape Cod, and the more because Tisquantum, whose peace before this time was wrought with Massasoit, undertook to discover unto us that supposed, and still hoped passage within the Shoals.

Both Colonies being thus agreed, and their companies fitted and joined together, we resolved to set forward, but were oft crossed in our purposes; as first Master Richard Greene, brother in Law to Master Weston, who from him had a charge in the oversight and government of his Colony, died suddenly at our Plantation, to whom we gave burial befitting his place, in the best manner we could. Afterward, having further order to proceed by letter from their other Governor at the Massachusetts, twice Captain Standish set forth with them, but were driven in again by cross and violent winds: himself the second time being sick of a violent fever. By reason whereof (our own wants being like to be now greater than formerly; partly, because we were enforced to neglect our come, and spend much time in fortification, but especially because such havoc was made of that little we had, through the unjust and dishonest carriage of those people before mentioned, at our first entertainment of them) our Governor in his own person supplied the Captains place, and in the month of November again set forth, having Tisquantum, for his Interpreter and Pilot, who affirmed he had twice passed within the Shoals of Cape Cod, both with English and French. Nevertheless, they went so far with him, as the Master of the ship saw no hope of passage: but being (as he thought) in danger, bare up, and according ' to Tisquantum's directions, made for an harbor not far from them, at a place called Manamoycke, which they found, and: sounding it with their shallop found the channel, though but narrow and crooked, where at length they harbored the ship. Here they perceived that the tide set in and out with more violence at some other place more Southerly, which they had not scene nor could discover, by reason of the violence of the season all the time of their abode there. Some judged the entrance thereof might be beyond the Shoals, but there is no certainty thereof as yet known.

That night the Governor accompanied with others, having Tisquantum for his Interpreter went ashore; At first the Inhabitants plated least in sight, because none of our people had ever been there before; but understanding the ends of their coming, at length came to them, welcoming our Governor according to their Savage manner, refreshing them very well with store of venison and other victuals, which they brought them in great abundance, promising to trade with them, with a seeming gladness of the occasion: yet their joy was mixed with much jealousy, as appeared by their after practices: for at first they were loath their dwellings should be known, but when they saw our Governors resolution to stay on the shore all night, they brought him to their houses, having first conveyed all their stuff to a remote place, not far from the same, which one of our men walking forth occasionally espied; whereupon, on the sudden, neither it nor them could be found, and so many times after upon conceived occasions, they would be all gone, bag and baggage: But being afterwards (by Tisquantum's means) better persuaded, they left their jealousy and traded with them; where they got eight hogsheads of come and beans, though the people were but few. This gave our Governor and the company good encouragement. Tisquantum being still confident in the passage, and the Inhabitants affirming, they had scene ships of good burthen pass within the Shoals aforesaid. But here, though they had determined to make a second assay, yet God had otherways disposed, who struck Tisquantum with sickness, in so much as he there died, which crossed their Southward trading, and the more because the Masters sufficiency was much doubted, and the season very tempestuous, and not fit to go upon discovery, having no guide to direct them.

From thence they departed, and the wind being faire for the Massachusetts went thither, and the rather because the Savages upon our motion had planted much come for us, which they promised not long before that time. When they came thither they found a great sickness to be amongst the Indians, not unlike the plague, if not the same. They renewed their complaints to our Governor, against that other plantation seated by them, for their injurious walking. But indeed the trade both for Furs and come was overthrown in that place, they giving as much for a quart of come, as we used to doe for a Beavers skin; so that little good could be there done.

From thence they returned into the bottom of the Bay of Cape Cod, to a place called Nauset, where the Sachem used the Governor very kindly, and where they bought eight or ten hogsheads of come and beans. Also at a place called Massachusetts, where they had like kind entertainment and come also. During the time of their trade in these places, there were so great and violent storms, as the ship was much endangered, and our shallop cast away, so that they had now no means to carry the come aboard that they had bought, the ship riding by their report well near two leagues from the same, her own Boat being small, and so leaky, (having no Carpenter with them) as they durst scarce fetch wood or water in her. Hereupon the Governor caused the come to be made in a round stack, and bought mats, and cut sedge to cover it, and gave charge to the Indians not to meddle with it, promising him that dwelt next to it a reward, if he would keep vermin also from it, which he undertook, and the Sachem promised to make good. In the mean time, according to the Governors request, the Sachem sent men to seek the shallop, which they found buried almost in sand at a high-water mark, having many things remaining in her, but unserviceable for the present; whereof the Governor gave the Sachem special charge that it should not be further broken, promising ere long to fetch both it and the come; assuring them, if neither were diminished, he would take it as a sign of their honest and true friendship, which they so much made show of, but if they were, they should certainly smart for their unjust and dishonest dealing, and further make good whatsoever they had so taken. So he did likewise at Massachusetts, and took leave of them, being resolved to leave the ship, and take his journey home by ten with our own company, sending word to the ship, that they should take their first opportunity to go for Plymouth, where he determined, by the permission of God, to meet them. And having procured a Guide, it being no less than fifty miles to our Plantation, set forward, receiving all respect that could be from the Indians in his journey, and came safely home, though weary and surbated, whither some three days after the ship also came. The come being divided which they had got, Master Weston's company went to their own Plantation, it being further agreed, that they should return with all convenient speed, and bring their Carpenter, that they might fetch the rest of the come, and save the shallop.

At their return, Captain Standish being recovered and in health, took another shallop, and went with them to the come, which they found in, safety as they left it: also they mended the other shallop, and got all their come aboard the ship. This was in January, as I take it, it being very cold and stormy, insomuch as (the harbor being none of the best) they were constrained to cut both the shallops from the ships stern, and so lost them both a second time. But the storm being over, and seeking out, they found them both, not having received any great hurt. Whilest they were at Nauset, having t occasion, to lie on the shore, laying their shallop in a Creek not far from them, an Indian came into the same, and stole certain Beads, scissors, and other trifles out of the same, which when the Captain missed, he took certain of his company with him, and went to the Sachem, telling him what had happened, and requiring the same again, or the party that stole them,. (who was known to certain of the Indians) or else he would revenge it on them before his departure, and so took leave for that night being late, refusing whatsoever kindness they offered; On the morrow, the Sachem came to their rendezvous, accompanied with many men, in a stately manner, who saluting the Captain in this wise; He thrust out his tongue, that one might see the root thereof, and therewith licked his hand from the wrist to the fingers end, withal bowing the knee, striving to imitate the English gesture, being instructed therein formerly by Tisquantum: his men did the like, but in so rude and savage a manner, as our men could scarce forbear to break out in open laughter. After salutation, he delivered the Beads, and other things, to the Captain, saying, he had much beaten the party for doing it, causing the women to make bread, and bring them, according to their desire, seeming to be very sorry for the fact, but glad to be reconciled. So they departed, and came home in safety; where the come was equally divided, as before.

After this the Governor went to two other inland Towns, with another company, and bought come likewise of them, the one is called Nemasket, the other Manomet. That from Nemasket was brought home partly by Indian women; but a great sickness arising amongst them, our own men were enforced to fetch home the rest. That at Manomet the Governor left in the Sachems custody: this Town lieth from us South well near twenty miles, and stands upon a fresh river, which runneth into the Bay of Narragansett, and cannot be less than sixty miles from thence. It will bear a boat of eight or ten tun to this place. Hither the Dutch or French, or both use to come. It is from hence to the Bay of Cape Cod about eight miles; out of which Bay it floweth into a Creek some six miles almost direct towards the Town. The heads of the River, and this Creek are not far distant. This River yieldeth thus high, Oysters, Muscles, Clams, and other shell-fish, one in shape like a bean, another like a Clam, both good meat, and great abundance at all times; besides it aboundeth with divers sorts of fresh fish in their seasons.

The Governor or Sachem of this place, was called Canacum, who had formerly, as well as many others, (yea all with whom as yet we had to doe) acknowledged themselves the subjects of our Sovereign Lord the King. This Sachem used the Governor very kindly, and it seemed was of good respect and authority amongst the Indians. For whilest the Governor was there within night in bitter weather, came two men from Manamoick before spoken of, and having set aside their bows and quivers, according to their manner, sate down by the fire, and took a pipe of Tobacco, not using any words in that time, nor any other to them, but all remained silent, expecting when they would speak: At length they looked toward Canacum, and one of them made a short speech, and delivered a present to him from his Sachem, which was a basket of Tobacco, and many Beads, which the other received thankfully. After which he made a long speech to him, the contents hereof was related to us by Hobomok (who then accompanied the Governor for his Guide) to be as followeth; It happened that two of their men fell out as they were in game ( for they use gaming as much as any where, and will play away all, even their skin from their backs, yea and for their wives skins also, though it may be they are many miles distant from them, as my self have scene) and growing to great heat, the one killed the other. The actor of this fact was a Powah, one of special note amongst them, and such an one as they could not well miss, yet another people greater than themselves threatened them with war, if they would not put him to death. The party offending was in hold, neither would their Sachem doe one way or other till their return, resting upon him for advice and furtherance in so weighty a matter. After this there was silence a short time; at length men gave their judgment what they thought best. Amongst others, he asked Hobomok what he thought? Who answered, he was but a stranger to them, but thought it was better that one should die than many, since he had deserved it, and the rest were innocent; whereupon he passed the sentence of death upon him.

Not long after (having no great quantity of come left) Captain Standish went again with a shallop to Massachusetts, meeting also with the like extremity of weather, both of wind, snow, and frost, insomuch as they were frozen in the harbor the first night they entered the same. Here they pretended their wonted love, and spared them a good quantity of come to confirm the same: Strangers also tame to this place, pretending only to see him and his company, whom they never saw before I that time, but intending to join with the rest to kill them, as after appeared. But being forced through extremity to lodge in their houses, which they much pressed, God possessed the heart of the Captain with just jealousy, giving strait command, that as one part of his company slept, the rest should wake, declaring some things to them which he understood, whereof he could make no good construction. Some of the Indians spying a fit opportunity, stole some beads also from him, which he no sooner perceive, having not above six men with him, drew them all from the Boat, and set them on their guard about the Sachems house, where the most of the people were, threatening to fall upon them without further delay, if they would not forthwith restore them, signifying to the Sachem especially, and so to them all, that as he would not offer the least injury; so he would not receive any at their hands, which should escape without punishment or due satisfaction. Hereupon the Sachem bestirred him to find out the party, which when he had done, caused him to return them again to the shallop, and came to the Captain, desiring him to search whether they were not about the Boat, who suspecting their knavery, sent one, who found them lying openly upon the Boats cuddy; yet to appease his anger, they brought come afresh to trade, insomuch as he laded his shallop, and so departed. This accident so daunted their courage, as they durst not attempt any thing against him. So that through the good mercy and providence of God they returned in safety. At this place the Indians get abundance of Bass both summer and winter: for it being now February they abounded with them.

In the beginning of March, having refreshed himself, he took a shallop; and went to Manomet, to fetch home that which the Governor had formerly bought, hoping also to get more from them, but was deceived in his expectation, not finding that entertainment he found else-where, and the Governor had there received. The reason whereof, and of the treachery intended in the place before spoken of, was not then known. unto us, but afterwards: wherein may be observed the abundant mercies of God working with his providence for our good. Captain Standish being now far from the Boat, and not above two or three of our men with him, and as many with the shallop, was not long at Canacum the Sachems house, but in came two of the Massachusetts men, the chief of them was called Witawamat, a notable insulting villain, one who had formerly imbrued his hands in the blood of English and French, and had oft boasted of his own valor, and derided their weakness, especially because (as he said) they died crying, making sour faces, more like children than men.

This villain took a dagger from about his neck, (which he had gotten of Master Weston's people) and presented it to the Sachem, and after made a long speech in an audacious manner, framing it in such sort, as the Captain (though he be the best Linguist amongst us) could not gather anything from it. The end of it was afterward discovered to be as followeth: The Massacheuseucks had formerly concluded to ruinate Master Weston's Colony, and thought themselves, being about thirty or forty men strong, enough to execute the same: yet they durst not attempt it, till such time as they had gathered more strength to themselves to make their party good against us at Plymouth, concluding, that if we remained, (though they had no other Arguments to use against us) yet we would never leave the death of our Countrymen unrevenged, and therefore their safety could not be without the overthrow of both Plantations. To this end they had formerly solicited this Sachem, as also the other called Ianough at Massachusetts, and many others to assist them, and now again came to prosecute the same; and since there was so faire an opportunity offered by the Captains presence, they thought best to make sure him and his company. After this his message was delivered, his entertainment much exceeded the Captains, insomuch as he scorned at their behavior, and told them of it; after which they would have persuaded him, because the weather was cold, to have sent to the Boat for the rest of his company, but he would not, desiring according to promise, that the come might be carried down, and he would content the women for their labor, which they did. At the same time there was a lusty Indian of Paomet or Cape Cod then present, who had ever demeaned himself well towards us, being in his general carriage, very affable, courteous, and loving, especially towards the Captain. This Savage was now entered into confederacy with the rest, yet to avoid suspicion, made many signs of his continued affections, and would needs bestow a kettle of some six or seven gallons on him, and would not accept of any thing in lieu thereof, saying, he was rich, and could afford to bestow such favors on his friends whom he loved: also he would freely help to carry some of the corn, affirming he had never done the like in his life before, and the wind being bad would needs lodge with him at their rendezvous, having indeed undertaken to kill him before they parted, which done they intended to fall upon the rest.

The night proved exceeding cold, insomuch as the Captain could not take any rest, but either walked or turned himself to and fro at the fire: This the other observed, and asked wherefore he did not sleep as at other times, who answered he knew not well, but had no desire at all to rest. So that he then mist his opportunity. The wind serving on the next day, they returned home, accompanied with the other Indian, who used many arguments to persuade them to go to Paomet, where himself had much come, and many other, the most whereof he would procure for us, seeming to sorrow for our wants. Once the Captain put forth with him, and was forced back by contrary wind; which wind serving for the Massachusetts, was fitted to go thither. But on a sudden it altered again. 
 During the time that the Captain was at Manomet, news came to Plymouth, that Massasoit was like to die, and that at the same time there was a Dutch ship driven so high on the shore by stress of weather, right before his dwelling, that till the tides increased, she could not be got off. Now it being a commendable manner of the Indians, when any (especially of note) are dangerously sick, for all that profess friendship to them, to visit them in their extremity, either in their persons, or else to send some acceptable persons to them, therefore it was thought meet (being a good and warrantable action) that as we had ever professed friendship, so we should now maintain the same, by observing this their laudable custom: and the rather, because we desired to have some conference with the Dutch, not knowing when we should have so fit an opportunity. To that end my self having formerly been there, and understanding in some measure the Dutch tongue, the Governor again laid this service upon my self, and fitted me with some cordials to administer to him, having one Master John Hamden a Gentleman of London (who then wintered with us, and desired much to see the Country) for my Consort, and Hobomok for our guide. So we set forward, and lodged the first night at Nemasket, where we had friendly entertainment.

The next day about one of the clock, we came to a ferry in Corbatant's Country, where upon discharge of my piece, divers Indians came to us from a house not far off. There they told us, that Massasoit was dead, and that day buried, and that the Dutch would be gone before we could get thither, having hove off their ship already. This news struck us blank: but especially Hobomok, who desired we might return with all speed. I told him I would first think of it, considering now that he being dead, Corbitant was the most like to succeed him, and that we were not above three miles from Mattapuyst his dwelling place, although he were but a hollow hearted friend towards us, I thought no time so fit as this, to enter into more friendly terms with him, and the rest of the Sachems thereabout, hoping (through the blessing of God) it would be a means in that unsettled state, to settle their affections towards us, and though it were somewhat dangerous, in respect of our personal safety, because my self and Hobomok had been employed upon a service against him, which he might now fitly revenge, yet esteeming it the best means, leaving the event to God in his mercy, I resolved to put it in practice, if Master Hamden and Hobomok durst attempt it with me, whom I found willing to that or any other course might tend to, the general good. So we went towards Mattapayst. In the way, Hobomok manifesting a troubled spirit, brake forth into these speeches, Neen womasu Sagimus, neen womasu Sagimus, etc. My loving Sachem, my loving Sachem, Many have I known, but never any like thee: And turning him to me said; Whilest I lived, I should never see his like amongst the Indians, saying, he was no liar, he was not bloody and quell like other Indians; In anger and passion he was soon reclaimed, easy to be reconciled towards such as had offended him, ruled by reason in such measure, as he would not scorn the advice of mean men, and that he governed his men better with few strokes than others did with many; truly loving where he loved; yea he feared we had not a faithful friend left among the Indians, strewing how he oft-times restrained their malice, etc. continuing a long speech with such signs of lamentation and unfeigned sorrow, as it would have made the hardest heart relent.

At length we came to Mattapuyst, and went to the Sachem Comaco (for so they call the Sachems place, though they call an ordinary house Witeo) but Corbitant the Sachem was not at home, but at Pokanoket, which was some five or six miles off; the Squa-sachem (for so they call the Sachems wife) gave us friendly entertainment. Here we inquired again concerning Massasoit, they thought him dead, but knew no certainty; whereupon I hired one to go with all expedition to Pokanoket, that we might know the certainty thereof, and withal to acquaint Corbitant with our there being. About half an hour before—Sun-setting, the messenger returned, and told us that he was not yet dead, though there was no hope we should find him living. Upon this we were much revived, and set forward with all speed, though it was late within night ere we got thither. About two of the clock that afternoon the Dutchmen departed, so that in that respect our journey was frustrate.

When we came thither, we found the house so full of men, as we could scarce get in, though they used their best diligence to make way for us. There were they in the midst of their charms for him, making such a hellish noise, as it distempered us that were well, and therefore unlike to ease him that was sick. About him were six or eight women, who chafed his arms, legs; and thighs, to keep heat in him; when they had made an end of their charming, one told him that his friends the English were come to see him; (having understanding left, but his sight was wholly gone) he asked who was come, they told him Winsnow (for they cannot pronounce the letter 1, but ordinarily n in the place thereof) he desired to speak with me; when I came to him, and they told him of it, he put forth his hand to me, which I took; then he said twice, though very inwardly, keen Winsnow, which is to say, Art thou Winslow? I answered ahhe, that is, yes; then he doubled these words, Matta neen wonckanet namen Winsnow; that is to say, O Winslow I shall never see thee again.

Then I called Hobomok and desired him to tell Massasoit, that the Governor hearing of his sickness was sorry for the same, and though by reason of many businesses he could not come himself, yet he sent me with such things for him as he thought most likely to doe him good in this his extremity and whereof if he pleased to take, I would presently give him; which he desired, and having a confection of many comfortable conserves, etc. on the point of my knife, I gave him some, which I could scarce get through his teeth; when it was dissolved in his mouth, he swallowed the juice of it, whereat those that were about him much rejoiced, saying, he had not swallowed any thing in two days before. Then I desired to see his mouth, which was exceedingly furred, and his tongue swelled in such manner, as it was not possible for him to eat such meat as they had, his passage being stops up: then I washed his mouth, and scraped his tongue, and got abundance of corruption out of the same. After which, I gave him more of the confection, which e swallowed with more readiness; then he desiring to drink, I dissolved some of it in water, and gave him thereof: within half an hour this wrought a great alteration in him in the eyes of all that beheld him; presently after his sight began to come to him, which gave him and us good encouragement. In the mean time I inquired how he slept, and when he went to the stool? They said he slept not in two days before, and had not had a stool in five; then I gave him more, and told him of a mishap we had by the way in breaking a bottle of drink, which the Governor also sent him, saying, if he would send any of his men to Patuxet, I would send for more of the same, also for chickens to make him broth, and for other things which I knew were good for him, and would stay the return of the messenger if he desired. This he took marvelous kindly, and appointed some who were ready to go by two of the clock in the morning, against which time I made ready a letter, declaring therein our good success, the state of his body, etc. desiring to send me such things as I sent for, and such physic as the Surgeon durst administer to him.

He requested me that the day following, I would take my Piece, and kill him some Fowl, and make him some English pottage, such as he had eaten at Plymouth, which I promised: after his stomach coming to him, I must needs make him some without Fowl, before I went abroad, which somewhat troubled me, being unaccustomed and unacquainted in such businesses, especially having nothing to make it comfortable, my Consort being as ignorant as my self; but being we must doe somewhat, I caused a woman to bruise some come, and take the flower from it, and set over the grit or broken come in a pipkin (for they have earthen pots of all sizes.) When the day broke, we went out (it being now March) to seek herbs, but could not find any but strawberry leaves, of which I gathered a handful and put into the same, and because I had nothing to relish it, I went forth again, and pulled up a sassafras root, and sliced a piece thereof, and boiled it till it had a good relish, and then took it out again. The broth being boiled, I strained it through my handkerchief, and gave him at least a pint, which he drank, and liked it very well. After this his sight mended more and more, also he had three moderate stools, and took some rest. Insomuch as we with admiration blessed God for giving his blessing to such raw and ignorant means, making no doubt of his recovery, himself and all of them acknowledging us the instruments of his preservation.

That morning he caused me to spend in going from one to another amongst those that were sick in the Town, requesting me to wash their mouths also, and give to each of them some of the same I gave him, saying, they were good folk. This pains I took with willingness, though it were much offensive to me, not being accustomed with such poisonous savors. After dinner he desired me to get him a Goose or Duck, and make him some pottage therewith, with as much speed as I could: so I took a man with me, and made a shot at a couple of Ducks, some six score paces off, and killed one, at which he wondered: so we returned forthwith, and dressed it, making more broth therewith, which he much desired; never did I see a man so low brought, recover in that measure in so short a time. The Fowl being extraordinary fat, I told Hobomok I must take off the top thereof, saying it would make him very sick again if he did eat it; this he acquainted Massasoit therewith, who would not be persuaded to it, though I pressed it very much, strewing the strength thereof, and the weakness of his stomach, which could not possibly bear it. Notwithstanding he made a gross meal of it, and ate as much as would well have satisfied a man in health. About an hour after he began to be very sick, and straining very much, cast up the broth again, and in overstraining himself, began to bleed at the nose, and so continued the space of four hours; then they all wished he had. been ruled, concluding now he would die, which we much feared also. They asked me what I thought of him; I answered, his case was desperate, yet it might be it would save his life: for if it ceased in time, he would forthwith sleep and take rest, which was the principal thing he wanted. Not long after his blood stained, and he slept at least six or eight hours; when he awaked I washed his face, and bathed and suppled his beard and nose with a linen cloth: but on a sudden he chops his nose in the water, and drew up some therein, and sent it forth again with such violence, as he began to bleed afresh, then they thought there was no hope, but we perceived it was but the tenderness of his nostril, and therefore told them I thought it would stay presently, as indeed it did.

The messengers were now returned, but finding his stomach come to him, he would not have the chickens killed, but kept them for breed. Neither durst we give him any physic which was then sent, because his body was so much altered since our instructions, neither saw we any need, not doubting now of his recovery, if he were careful. Many whilest we were there came to see him, some by their report from a place not less than an hundred miles. To all that came, one of his chief men related the manner of his sickness, how near he was spent, how amongst others his friends the English came to see him, and how suddenly they recovered him to this strength they saw, he being now able to sit upright of himself.

The day before our coming, another Sachem being there, told him, that now he might see how hollow-hearted the English were, saying if we had been such friends in deed, as we were in show, we would have visited him in this his sickness, using many arguments to withdraw his affections, and to persuade him to give way to some things against us, which were motioned to him not long before: but upon this his recovery, he brake forth into these speeches; Now I see the English are my friends and love me, and whilest I live I will never forget this kindness they have showed meet Whilest we were there, our entertainment exceeded all other strangers. Divers other things were worthy the noting, but I fear I have been too tedious.

At our coming away, he called Hobomok to him, and privately (none hearing save two or three other of his Pnieses, who are of his Council) revealed the plot of the Massacheuseucks before spoken of, against Master Weston's Colony, and so against us, saying that the people of Nauset, Paomet, Succonet Mattachiest, Manomet, Agoweywam, and the Isle of Capawack, were joined with them; himself also in his sickness was earnestly solicited, but he would neither join therein, nor give way to any of his. Therefore as we respected the lives of our Countrymen, and our own after safety, he advised us to kill the men of Massachusetts, who were the authors of this intended mischief. And whereas we were wont to say, we would not strike a stroke till they first begun; if said he upon this intelligence, they make that answer, tell them, when their Countrymen at Wessagussett are killed, they being not able to defend themselves, that then it will be too late to recover their lives, nay through the multitude of adversaries they shall with great difficulty preserve their own, and therefore he counseled without delay to take away the principals, and then the plot would cease. With this he charged him thoroughly to acquaint me by the way, that I might inform the Governor thereof at my first coming home. Being fitted for our return, we took out leave of him, who returned many thanks to our Governor, and also to our selves for our labor and love: the like did all that were about him. So we departed.

That night through the earnest request of Corbitant, who till now remained at Sawcaans or Pokanoket, we lodged with him at Mattaiuyst. By the way I had much conference with him; so likewise at his house, he being a notable politician, yet full of merry jests and squibs, and never better pleased than when the like are returned again upon him. Amongst other things he asked me, If in case he were thus dangerously sick, as Massasoit had been, and should send word thereof to Patuxet for Maskiet, that is, Physic, whether then Mr. Governor would send it? And if he would, whether I would come therewith to him? To both which I answered yea, whereat he gave me many joyful thanks. After that, being at his house he demanded further, how we durst being but two come so far into the Country? I answered, where was true love there was no fear, and my heart was so upright towards them that for mine own part I was fearless to come amongst them. But, said he, if your love be such, and it bring forth such fruits, how cometh it to pass, that when we come to Patuxet, you stand upon your guard, with the mouths of your pieces presented towards us ? Whereunto I answered, it was the most honorable and respective entertainment we could give them; it being an order amongst us so to receive our best respected friends: and as it was used on the Land, so the ships observed it also at Sea, which Hobomok knew, and had scene observed. But shaking the head he answered, that he liked not such salutations.

Further, observing us to crave a blessing on our meat before we did eat, and after to give thanks for the same, he asked us what was the meaning of that ordinary custom? Hereupon I took occasion to tell them of Gods works of Creation, and Preservation, of his Laws and Ordinances, especially of the ten Commandments, all which they hearkened unto with great attention, and liked well of: only the seventh Commandment they excepted against, thinking there were many inconveniences in it, that a man should be tied to one woman: about which we reasoned a good time. Also I told them that whatsoever good things we had, we received from God, as the Author and giver thereof, and therefore- craved his blessing upon that we had, and were about to eat, that it might nourish and strengthen our bodies, and having eaten sufficient, being satisfied therewith, we again returned thanks to the same our God for that our refreshing, etc. This all of them concluded to be very well, and said, they believed almost all the same things, and that the same power that we called God, they called Kiehtan. Much profitable conference was occasioned hereby, which would be too tedious to relate, yet was no less delightful to them, then comfortable to us. Here we remained only that night, but never had better entertainment amongst any of them.

The day following, in our journey, Hobomok told me of the private conference he had with Massasoit, and how he charged him perfectly to acquaint me therewith (as I showed before) which having done, he used many arguments himself to move us hereunto; That night we lodged at Nemasket, and the day following about the mid way between it and home, we met two Indians, who told us that Captain Standish was that day gone to the Massachusetts: but contrary winces again drive him back, so that we found him at home; where the Indian of Paomet still was, being very importunate that the Captain should take the first opportunity of a faire wind to go with him, but their secret and villainous purposes being through Gods mercy now made known, the Governor caused Captain Standish to send him away without any distaste or manifestation of anger, that we might the better effect and bring to pass that which should be thought most necessary.
 Before this journey we heard many complaints both by the Indians and some others of best desert amongst Master Weston's Colony, how exceedingly their Company abased themselves by indirect means, to get victuals from the Indians, who dwelt not far from them, fetching them wood and water, etc. and all for a meals meat, whereas in the mean time, they might with diligence have gotten enough to have served them three or four times. Other by night brake the earth, and robbed the Indians store, for which they had been publicly stocked and whips, and yet was there small amendment. This was about the end of February, at which time they had spent all their bread and come, not leaving any for seed, neither would the Indians lend or sell them any more upon any terms. Hereupon they had thoughts to take it by violence, and to that ends spiked up every entrance into their Town (being well impaled) save one, with a full resolution to proceed. But some more honestly minded, advised John Sanders their Over-seer first to write to Plymouth, and if the Governor advised him thereunto, he might the better do it. This course was well liked, and an Indian was sent with all speed with a letter to our Governor, the contents whereof were to this effect; That being in great want, and. their people daily falling down, he intended to go to Monhiggan, where was a Plantation of Sir Ferdinando Gorges, to buy bread from the Ships that came thither a fishing, with the first opportunity of wind; but knew not how the Colony would be preserved till his return: he had used all means both to buy and borrow of Indians whom he knew to be stored, and he thought maliciously with-held it, and therefore was resolved to take it by violence, and only waited the return of the Messenger, which he desired should be hastened, craving his advice therein, promising also to make restitution afterward. The Governor upon the receipt hereof, asked the Messenger what store of come they had, as if he had intended to buy of them; who answered very little more then that they reserved for seed, having already spared all they could.

Forth-with the Governor and his Assistant sent for many of us to advise with them herein, who after serious consideration, no way approving of this intended course, the Governor answered his Letter, and caused many of us to set our hands thereto, the contents whereof were to this purpose; We altogether disliked their intendment, as being against the law of God and Nature, strewing how it would cross the worthy ends and proceedings of the Kings Majesty, and his honorable Council for this place, both in respect of the peaceable enlarging of his Majesties Dominions, and also of the propagation of the knowledge and Law of God, and the glad tidings of salvation, which we and they were bound to seek, and were not to use such means as would breed a distrust in the Salvages against our persons and professions, assuring them their Master would incur much blame hereby, neither could they answer the same; For our own parts our case was almost the same with theirs, having but a small quantity of Corn left, and were enforced to live on ground nuts, clams, mussels, and such other things as naturally the Country afforded, and which did and would maintain strength, and were easy to be gotten, all which things they had in great abundance, yea, Oysters also which we wanted, and therefore necessity could not be said to constrain them thereunto. Moreover, that they should consider, if they proceeded therein, all they could so get would maintain them but a small time, and then they must perforce seek their food abroad, which having made the Indians their enemies, would be very difficult for them, and therefore much better to begin a little the sooner, and so continue their peace, upon which course they might with good conscience desire and expect the blessing of God, whereas on the contrary they could not.

Also that they should consider their own weakness, being most swelled, and diseased in their bodies, and therefore the more unlikely to make their party good against them, and that they should not expect help from us in that or any the like unlawful actions. Lastly, that howsoever some of them might escape, yet the principal Agents should expect no better then the gallows, whensoever any special Officer should be sent over by his Majesty, or his Council for New England, which we expected, and who would undoubtedly call them to account for the same. These were the contents of our Answer, which was directed to their whole Colony. Another particular Letter our Governor sent to John Sanders, strewing how dangerous it would be for him above all others, being he was their leader and commander; and therefore in friendly manner advised him to desist.

With these Letters we dispatched the Messenger; Upon the receipt whereof they altered their determination, resolving to shift as they could, till the return of John Sanders from Monhiggan, who first coming to Plymouth, notwithstanding our own necessities, the Governor spared him some Corn to carry them to Monhiggan. But not having sufficient for the Ships store, he took a Shallop and leaving others with instructions to oversee things till his return, set forward about the end of February, so that he knew not of this conspiracy of the Indians before his going; neither was it known to any of us till our return from Sawaams or Pokanoket: At which time also another Sachem called Wassapinewat, brother to Obtakiest the Sachem of the Massachusetts, who had formerly smarted for par taking with Corbitant, and fearing the like again, to purge himself revealed the same thing.

The three and twentieth of March being now come, which is a yearly Court-day, the Governor having a double testimony, and many circumstances agreeing with the truth thereof, not being to undertake war without the consent of the body of the Company; made known the same in public Court, offering it to the consideration of the Company, it being high time to come to resolution, how sudden soever it seemed to them, fearing it would be put in execution before we could give any intelligence thereof. This business was no less troublesome then grievous, and the more, because it is so ordinary in these times for men to measure things by the events thereof: but especially for that we knew no means to deliver our Countrymen and preserve our selves, then by returning their malicious and quell purposes upon their own heads, and causing them to fall into the same pity they had digged for others, though it much grieved us to shed the blood of those whose good we ever intended and aimed at, as a principal in all our proceedings. But in the end we came to this public conclusion, that because it was a matter of such weight as every man was not of sufficiency to judge, nor fitness to know because of many other Indians which daily as occasion serveth converse with us; therefore the Governor, his Assistant, and the Captain, should take such to themselves as they thought most meet, and conclude thereof; which done we came to this conclusion, That Captain Standish should take so many men as he thought sufficient to make his party good against all the Indians in the Massachusetts-bay; and because (as all men know that have had to do in that kind) it is impossible to deal with them upon open defiance, but to take them in such traps as they lay for others; therefore he should pretend trade as at other times: but first go to the English and acquaint them with the plot, and the end of his own coming, that comparing it with their carriages towards them he might the better judge of the certainty of it, and more fitly take opportunity to revenge the same: but should forbear if it were possible till such time as he could make sure Wituwamat, that bloody and bold villain be fore spoken of, whose head he had order to bring with him, that he might be a warning and terror to all of that disposition.

Upon this Captain Standish made choice of eight men, and would not take more because he would prevent jealousy, knowing their guilty consciences would soon be provoked hereunto: but on the next day before he could go, came one of Mr. Weston's Company by land unto us, with his pack at his back, who made a pitiful narration of their lamentable and weak estate, and of the Indians carriages, whose boldness increased abundantly, insomuch as the victuals they got they would take it out of their pots and eat before their faces, yea if in any thing they gainsaid them, they were ready to hold a knife at their breasts; that to give them content, since John Sanders went to Monhiggan, they had hanged one of them that stole their come, and yet they regarded it not; that another of their Company was turned Salvage, that their people had most forsaken the town, and made their rendezvous where they got their victuals, because they would not take pains to bring it home; that they had sold their clothes for come, and were ready to starve both with cold and hunger also, because they could not endure to get victuals by reason of their nakedness; and that they were dispersed into-three Companies scarce having any powder and shot left. What would be the event of these things (he said) he much feared; and therefore not daring to stay any longer among them, though he knew not the way yet adventured to come to us, partly to make known their weak and dangerous estate, as he conceived, and partly to desire he might there remain till things were better settled at the other plantation. As this relation was grievous to us, so it gave us good encouragement to proceed in our intendments, for which Captain Standish was now fitted, and the wince coming faire, I the next day set forth for the Massachusetts.

The Indians at the Massachusetts missed this man, and suspecting his coming to us as we conceive, sent one after him and gave out there that he would never come to Patuxet, but that some Wolves or Bears would eat him: but we know both by our own experience and the report of others, that though they find a man sleeping, yet so soon as there is life discerned they fear and shun him. This Indian missed him but very little, and missing him passed by the town and went to Manomet, whom we hoped to take at his return, as afterward we did. Now was our Fort made fit for service and some Ordnance mounted; and though it may seem long work it being ten months since it begun, yet we must note, that whereso great a work is begun with such small means, a little time cannot bring to perfection: beside those works which tend to the preservation of man, the enemy of mankind will hinder what in him lieth, sometimes blinding the judgment and causing reasonable men to reason against their own safety, as amongst us diverse seeing the work prove tedious, would have dissuaded from proceeding, flattering themselves with peace and security, and accounting it rather a work of superfluity and vain-glory, then simple necessity. But God (whose providence hath waked and as I may say, watched for us whilst we slept) having determined to preserve us from these intended treacheries, undoubtedly ordained this as a special means to advantage us and discourage our adversaries, and therefore so stirred up the hearts of the Governors and other forward instruments, as the work was just made serviceable against this needful and dangerous time, though we ignorant of the same.

But that I may proceed, the Indian last mentioned in his return from Monomet, came through the town pretending still friendship and in love to see us, but as formerly others, so his end was to see whether we continued still in health and strength, or fell into weakness like their neighbors, which they hoped and looked for (though God in mercy provided better for us) and he knew would be glad tidings to his Country men. But here the Governor stayed him, and sending for him to the Fort, there gave the Guard charge of him as their prisoner, where he told him he must be contented to remain till the return of Captain Standish from the Massachusetts, so he was locked in a chain to a staple in the Court of guard, and there kept. Thus was our Fort hanselled, this being the first day as I take it, that ever any watch was there kept. The Captain being now come to the Massachusetts, went first to the ship, but found neither man, or so much as a dog therein: upon the discharge of a Musket the Master and some others of the plantation showed themselves, who were on the shore gathering ground-nuts and getting other food. After salutation Captain Standish asked them how they durst so leave the ship and live in such security, who answered like men senseless of their own misery, they feared not the Indians, but lived and suffered them to lodge with them, not having sword, or gun, or needing the same. To which the Captain answered, if there were no cause he was the gladder but upon further inquiry, understanding that those in whom John Sanders had received most special confidence and left in his stead to govern the rest were at the Plantation, thither he went, and to be brief, made known the Indians purpose and the end of his own coming, as also (which formerly I omitted) that if afterward they durst not there stay, it was the intendment of the Governors and people of Plymouth there to receive them till they could be better provided: but if they conceived of any other course that might be more likely for their good, that himself should further them therein to the uttermost of his power. These men comparing other circumstances with that they now heard, answered, they could expect no better, and it was Gods mercy that they were riot killed before his coming, desiring therefore that he would neglect no opportunity to proceed: Hereupon he advised them to secrecy, yet withal to send special command to one third of their Company that were farthest off to come home, and there enjoin them on pain of death to keep the town, himself allowing them a pint of Indian come to a man for a day (though that store he had was spared out of [our] seed.) The weather proving very wet and stormy, it was the longer before he could do any thing.

In the mean time an Indian came to him and brought some furs, but rather to gather what he could from the Captains then coming then for trade; and though the Captain carried things as smoothly as possibly he could, yet at his return he reported he saw by his eyes that he was angry in his heart, and therefore began to suspect themselves discovered. This caused one Pequot who was a Pinese, being a man of a notable spirit to come to Hobomok, who was then with them, and told him he understood that the Captain was come to kill himself and the rest of the Salvages there, tell him said he we know it, but fear him not, neither will we shun him; but let him begin when he dare, he shall not take us at unawares: many times after diverse of them severally, or few together, came to the Plantation to him, where they would whet and sharpen the points of their knives before his face, and use many other insulting gestures and speeches. Amongst the rest, Witawamat bragged of the excellency of his knife; on the end of the handle there was pictured a woman's face, but said he, I have another at home wherewith I have killed both French and English, and that hath a mans face on it, and by and by these two must marry: Further he said of that knife he there had; Hinnaim namen, hinnaim michen, rnatta cuts: that is to say, By and by it should see, and by and by it should eat, but not speak. Also Pecksuot being a man of greater stature then the Captain, told him though he were a great Captain, yet he was but a little man: and said he, though I be no Sachem, yet I am a man of great strength and courage. These things the Captain observed, yet bare with patience for the present.

On the next day, seeing he could not get many of them together at once, and this Pecksuot and Wituwamat both together, with another man, and a youth of some eighteen years of age, which was brother to Wituwamat, and villain-like bode in his steps, daily putting many tricks upon the weaker sort of men, and having about as many of his own Company in a room with them, gave the word to his men, and the dove being fast shut began himself with Pecksuot, and snatching his own knife from his neck though with much struggling killed him therewith, the point whereof he had made as sharp as a needle, and ground the back also to an edge: Wituwamat and the other man, the rest killed, and took the youth, whom the Cap. caused to be hanged; but it is incredible how many wounds these two Pneeses received before they dyed, not making any fearful noise, but catching their weapons and striving to the last. Hobomok stood by all this time as a spectator and meddled not, observing how our men demeaned themselves in this action; all being here ended, smiling he brake forth into these speeches to the Captain, Yesterday Pecksuot bragging of his own strength and stature, said, though you were a great Captain yet you were but a little man; but to day I see you are big enough to lay him on the ground. But to proceed, there being some women at the same time, Captain Standish left them in the custody of Mr. Weston's people at the town, and sent word to another Company that had intelligence of things to kill those Indian men that were amongst them, these killed two more: himself also with some of his own men went to another place, where they killed another, and through the negligence of one man an Indian escaped, who discovered and crossed their proceedings.

Not long before this execution, three of Mr. Weston's men which more regarded their bellies then any command or Commander, having formerly fared well with the Indians for making them Canoes, went again to the Sachem to offer their service, and had entertainment. The first night they came thither within night late came a Messenger with all speed, and delivered a sad and short message: Whereupon all the men gathered together, put on their boots and breeches, trussed up themselves, and took their bows and arrows and went forth, telling them they went a hunting, and that at their return they should have venison enough. Being now gone, one being more ancient and wise than the rest, calling former things to mind, especially the Captain's presence, and the strait charge that on pain of death none should go a musket shot from the plantation, and comparing this sudden departure of theirs therewith, began to dislike and wish himself at home again, which was further off than divers other dwelt. Hereupon he moved his fellows to return, but could not persuade them. So there being none but women left, and the other that was turned savage, about midnight came away, forsaking the paths, lest he should be pursued; and by this means saved his life.

Captain Standish took one half of his men, and one or two of Mr. Weston's, and Hobomok, still seeking to make spoil of them and theirs. At length they espied a file of Indians, which made towards them amain; and there being a small advantage in the ground, by reason of a hill near them, both companies strove for it. Captain Standish got it; whereupon they retreated, and took each man his tree, letting fly their arrows amain, especially at himself and Hobomok. Whereupon Hobomok cast off his coat, and being a known pinese, (theirs being now killed,) chased them so fast, as our people were not able to hold way with him; insomuch as our men could have but one certain mark, and then but the arm and half face of a notable villain, as he drew at Captain Standish; who together with another both discharged at once at him, and brake his arm; whereupon they fled into a swamp. When they were in the thicket, they parleyed, but to small purpose, getting nothing but foul language. So our Captain dared the sachem to come out and fight like a man, showing how base and woman-like he was in tonguing it as he did; but he refused, and fled. So the Captain returned to the Plantation; where he released the women, and would not take their beaver coats from them, nor suffer the least discourtesy to be offered them.

Now were Mr. Weston's people resolved to leave their plantation, and go for Monhiggan, hoping to get passage and return with the fishing ships. The Captain told them, that for his own part he durst there live with fewer men than they were; yet since they were otherways minded, according to his order from the governors and people of Plymouth, he would help them with corn competent for their provision by the way; which he did, scarce leaving himself more than brought them home. Some of them disliked the choice of the body to go to Monhiggan, and therefore desiring to go with him to Plymouth, he took them into the shallop: and seeing them set sail and clear of the Massachusetts bay, he took leave and returned to Plymouth, whither he came in safety (blessed be God) and brought the head of Wituwamat with him.

Amongst the rest there was an Indian youth that was ever of a courteous and loving disposition towards Us, he notwithstanding the death of his Countrymen came to the Captain without fear, saying his good conscience and love towards us emboldened him so to do. This youth confessed that the Indians intended to kill Mr. Weston's people, and not to delay any longer then till they had two more Canoes or Boats, which Mr. Weston's men would have finished by this time (having made them three already) had not the Captain prevented them, and the end of stay for those Boats, was to take their Ship therewith.

Now was the Captain returned and received with joy, and the head being brought to the fort and there set up, the Governors and Captains with divers others went up the same further to examine the prisoner, who looked piteously on the head, being asked whether he knew it, he answered, yea: Then he confessed the plot, and that all the people provoked Obtakiest their Sachem hereunto, being drawn to it by their importunity: Five there were (he said) that prosecuted it with more eagerness then the rest, the two principal were killed, being Pecksuot and Witowamat, whose head was there, the other three were Powahs, being yet living, and known unto Us, though one of them was wounded, as aforesaid. For himself he would not acknowledge that he had any hand therein, begging earnest for his life, saying, he was not a Massachusetts man, but as a stranger lived with them. Hobomok also gave a good report of him, and besought for him but was bribed so to do:

Nevertheless, that we might show mercy as well as extremity, the Governor released him, and the rather because we desired he might carry a message to Obtakiest his Master. No sooner were the irons from his legs, but he would have been gone, but the Governor bid him stay and fear not, for he should receive no hurt, and by Hobomok commanded him to deliver this message to his Master; That for our parts, it never entered into our hearts to take such a course with them, till their own treachery enforced us hereunto, and therefore might thank themselves for their own over-throw, yet since he had begun, if again by any the like courses he did provoke him, his Country should not hold him, for he would never suffer him or his to rest in peace, till he had utterly consumed them, and therefore should take this as a warning. Further, that he should send to Patuxet the three Englishmen he had and not kill them; also that he should not spoil the pale and houses at Wessagussett, and that this Messenger should either bring the English, or an answer, or both, promising his safe return.

This message was delivered, and the party would have returned with answer, but was at first dissuaded by them, whom afterward they would but could not persuade to come to us. At length (though long) a Woman came and told us that Obtakiest was sorry that the English were killed before he heard from the Governor, otherwise he would have sent them. Also she said, he would fain make his peace again with us, but none of his men durst come to treat about it, having forsaken his dwelling, and daily removed from place to place, expecting when we would take further vengeance on him.

Concerning those other people that intended to join with the Massachuseucks against us, though we never went against any of them, yet this sudden and unexpected execution, together with the just judgment of God upon their guilty consciences, hath so terrified and amazed them, as in like manner they forsook their houses, running to and fro like men distracted, living in swamps and other desert places, and so brought manifold diseases amongst themselves, whereof very many are dead, as Canacum the Sachem of Manomet, Aspinet, the Sachem of Nauset, and Ianough, Sachem of Mattachuest. This Sachem in his life, in the midst of these distractions, said the God of the English was offended with them, and would destroy them in his anger, and certainly it is strange to hear how many of late have, and still daily die amongst them, neither is there any likelihood it will easily cease, because through fear they set little or no Corn, which is the staff of life, and without which they cannot long preserve health and strength. From one of these places a boat was sent with presents to the Governor, hoping thereby to work their peace, but the boat was cast away, and three of the persons drowned, not far from our plantation, only one escaped, who durst not come to us, but returned, so as none of them dare come amongst us.

I fear I have been too tedious both in this and other things, yet when I considered how necessary a thing it is that the truth and grounds of this action, especially should be made known, and the several dispositions of that dissolved Colony, whose reports undoubtedly will be as various, I could not but enlarge my self where I thought to be most brief; neither durst I be too brief, least I should eclipse and rob God of that honor, glory, and praise, which belongeth to him for preserving us from falling when we were at the pits brim, and yet feared nor knew not that we were in danger. 
 The month of April being now come, on all hands we began to prepare for Corn. And because there was no Corn left before this time, save that was preserved for seed, being also hopeless of relief by supply, we thought best to leave off all other works, and prosecute that as most necessary. And because there was no small hope of doing good in that common course of labor that formerly we were in, for that the Governors that followed men to their labors, , had nothing to give men for their necessities, and therefore could not so well exercise that command of them therein as formerly they had done, especially considering that self-love wherewith every man (in a measure more or less) loveth and preferreth his own good before his neighbors, and also the base disposition of some drones, that as at other times so now especially would be most burdenous to the rest; It was therefore thought best that every man should use the best diligence he could, for his own preservation, both in respect of the time present and to prepare his own Corn for the year following and bring in a competent portion for the maintenance of public Officers, Fishermen, etc. which could not be freed from their calling without greater inconveniences. This course was to continue till harvest, and then the Governors to gather in the appointed portion, for the maintenance of themselves and such others as necessity constrained to exempt from this Condition. Only if occasion served upon any special service they might employ such as they thought most fit to execute the same, during this appointed time, and at the end thereof all men to be employed by them in such service as they thought most necessary for the general good. And because there is great difference in the ground, that therefore a set quantity should be set down for a person, and each man to have his fall by lot, as being most just and equal, and against which no man could except.

At a general meeting of the Company, many courses were propounded, but this approved and followed, as being the most likely for the present and future good of the Company; and therefore before this month began to prepare our ground against seed-time. In the midst of April we began to set, the weather being then seasonable, which much encouraged us, giving us good hopes of after plenty: the setting season is good till the latter end of May. But it pleased God for our further chastisement, to send a great drought, insomuch, as in six weeks after the latter setting there scarce fell any rain, so that the stalk of that was first set began to send forth the ear before it came to half growth, and that which was later, not like to yield any at all, both blade and stalk hanging the head, and changing the color in such manner, as we judged It utterly dead: our Beans also ran not up according to their wonted manner, but stood at a stay, many being parched away, as though they had been scorched before the fire. Now were our hopes overthrown, and we discouraged, our joy being turned into mourning.

To add also to this sorrowful estate in which we were, we heard of a supply that was sent unto us many months since, which having two repulses before, was a third time in company of another ship three hundred Leagues at Sea, and now in three months time heard no further of her, only the signs of a wrack were scene on the coast, which could not be judged to be any other then the same. So that at once God seemed to deprive us of all future hopes. The most courageous were now discouraged, because God which hitherto had been our only Shield and Supporter, now seemed in his anger to arm himself against us; and who can withstand the fierceness of his wrath.

These, and the like considerations moved not only every good man privately to enter Into examination with his own estate between God and his conscience, and so to humiliation before him: but also more solemnly to humble our selves together before the Lord by fasting and prayer. To that end a day was appointed by public authority, and set a-part from all other employments, hoping that the same God which had stirred us Up hereunto, would be moved hereby in mercy to look down upon Us, and grant the request of our dejected souls, if our continuance there might any way stand with his glory and our good. But oh the mercy of our God! Who was as ready to hear as we to ask: For though in the morning when we assembled together, the heavens were as clear and the drought as like to continue as ever it was: yet (our exercise continuing some eight or nine hours) before our departure the weather was over-cast, the clouds gathered together on all sides, and on the next morning distilled such soft, sweet, and moderate showers of rain, continuing some fourteen days, and mixed with such seasonable weather, as it was hard to say whether our withered Corn or drooping affections were most quickened or revived. Such was the bounty and goodness of our God. Of this the Indians by means of Hobomok took notice: who being then in the Town, and this exercise in the midst of the week, said, it was but three days since Sunday, and therefore demanded of a boy what was the reason thereof? Which when he knew and saw what effects followed thereupon, he and all of them admired the goodness of our God towards us, that wrought so great a change in so short a time, strewing the difference between their conjuration, and our invocation on the name of God for rain; theirs being mixed with such storms and tempests, as sometimes in stead of doing them good, it layeth the Corn flat on the ground, to their prejudice: but ours in so gentle and seasonable a manner, as they never observed the like.

At the same time Captain Standish being formerly employed by the Governor to buy provisions for the refreshing of the Colony, returned with the same, accompanied with one Mr. David Tomson, a Scotchman, who also that Spring began a Plantation twenty-five leagues northeast from us, near Smiths Isles, at a place called Pascatoquack, where he liketh well. Now also heard we of the third repulse that our supply had, of their safe though dangerous return into England, and of their preparation to come to us. So that having these many signs of Gods favor and acceptation, we thought it would be great ingratitude, if secretly we should smoother up the same, or content our selves with private thanksgiving for that which by private prayer could not be obtained. And therefore another solemn day was set a-part and appointed for that end, wherein we returned glory, honor, and praise, with all thankfulness to our God, which dealt so graciously with us, whose name for these and all other his mercies towards his Church and chosen ones, by them be blessed and praised now and evermore, Amen.

In the latter end of July and the beginning of August, came two Ships with supply unto us, who brought all their passengers, except one, in health, who recovered in short time, who also notwithstanding, all our wants and hardship (blessed be God) found not any one sick person amongst us at the Plantation. The bigger Ship called the Anne was hired, and there again freighted back, from whence we set sail the tenth of September. The lesser called the little James, was built for the company at their charge. She was now also fitted for Trade and discovery to the South-ward of Cape Cod, and almost ready to set sail, whom I pray God to bless in her good and lawful proceedings. 
 Thus have I made a true and full Narration of the state of our Plantation, and such things as were most remarkable therein since December 1621. If I have omitted any thing, it is either through weakness of memory, or because I judged it not material: I confess my stile rude, and unskillfulness in the task I undertook, being urged hereunto by opportunity, which I knew to be wanting in others, and but for which I would not have undertaken the same; yet as it is rude so it is plain, and therefore the easier to be understood; wherein others may see that which we are bound to acknowledge, viz. That if ever any people in these later ages were upheld by the providence of God after a more special manner then others, then we: and therefore are the more bound to celebrate the memory of his goodness, with everlasting thankfulness. For in these forenamed straits, such was our state, as in the morning we had often our food to seek for the day, and yet performed the duties of our Callings, I mean other daily labors, to provide for after time: and though at some times in some seasons at noon I have seen men stagger by reason of faintness for want of food, yet ere night by the good providence and blessing of God, we have enjoyed such plenty as though the windows of heaven had been opened unto us. How few, weak, and raw were we at our first beginning, and there selling, and in the midst of barbarous enemies? yet God wrought our peace for us. How often have we been at the pits brim, and in danger to be swallowed up, yea, not knowing, till afterward that we were in peril? and yet God preserved us: yea, and from how many that we yet know not of, he that knoweth all things can best tell: So that when I seriously consider of things, I cannot but think that God hath a purpose to give that Land as an inheritance to our Nation, and great pity it were that it should long lie in so desolate a state, considering it agreeth so well with the constitution of our bodies, being both fertile, and so temperate for heat and cold, as in that respect one can scarce distinguish New-England from Old.

A few things I thought meet to add hereunto, which I have observed amongst the Indians, both touching their Religion, and sundry other Customs amongst them. And first, whereas my self and others, in former Letters (which came to the Press against my will and knowledge) wrote, that the Indians about us are a people without any Religion, or knowledge of any God, therein I erred, though we could then gather no better: For as they conceive of many divine powers, so of one whom they call Kiehtan, to be the principal and maker of all the rest, and to be made by none: He (they say) created the heavens, earth, sea, and all creatures contained therein. Also that he made one man and one woman, of whom they and we and all mankind came: but how they became so far dispersed that know they not. At first they say, there was no Sachem, or King, but Kiehtan, who dwelleth above in the Heavens, whither all good men go when they die, to see their friends, and have their fill of all things: This his habitation lyeth far West-ward in the heavens, they say; thither the bad men go also, and knock at his door, but he bids them Quatchet, that is to say, Walk abroad, for there is no place for such; so that they wander in restless want and penury: Never man saw this Kiehtan; only old men tell them of him, and bid them tell their children, yea, to charge them to teach their posterities the same, and lay the like charge upon them. This power they acknowledge to be good, and when they would obtain any great matter, meet together, and cry unto him, and so likewise for plenty, victory, etc. sing, dance, feast, give thanks, and hang up Garlands and other things in memory of the same.

Another power they worship, whom they call Hobomok, and to the Northward of us Hobbamoqui; this as far as we can conceive is the Devil, him they call upon to cure their wounds and diseases. When they are curable, he persuades them he sends the same for some conceived anger against them, but upon their calling upon him can and cloth help them: But when they are mortal, and not curable in nature, then he persuades them Kiehtan is angry and sends them, whom none can cure: in so much, as in that respect only they somewhat doubt whether he be simply good, and therefore in sickness never call upon him.  This Hobomok appears in sundry forms unto them, as in the shape of a Man, a Deer, a Fawn, an Eagle, etc. but most ordinarily a Snake: He appears not to all but the chiefest and most judicious amongst them, though all of them strive to attain to that hellish height of honor.

He appeareth most ordinary and is most conversant with three sorts of people, one I confess I neither know by name nor office directly of these they have few but esteem highly of them, and think that no weapon can kill them: another they call by the name of Powah, and the third Pniese.  The office and duty of the Powah is to be exercised principally in calling upon the Devil, and curing diseases of the sick or wounded. The common people join with him in the exercise of invocation, but do but only assent, or as we term it, say ten to that he saith, yet sometime break out into a short musical note with him. The Powah is eager and free in speech, fierce in countenance, and joineth many antics and laborious gestures with the same over the party diseased. If the party be wounded he will also seem to suck the wound, but if they be curable (as they say) he toucheth it not, but a Skooke, that is the Snake, or Wobsacuck, that is the Eagle, sitteth on his shoulder and licks the same. This none see but the Powah, who tells them he cloth it himself. If the party be otherwise diseased, it is accounted sufficient if in any shape he but come into the house, taking it for an undoubted sign of recovery.

And as in former ages Apollo had his temple at Delphos, and Diana at Ephesus; so have I heard them call upon some as if they had their residence in some certain places, or because they appeared in those forms in the same. In the Powahs speech he promiseth to sacrifice many skins of beasts, kettles, hatchets, beads knives, and other the best things they have to the fiend, if he will come to help the party diseased: But whether they perform it I know not. The other practices I have scene, being necessarily called at some times to be with their sick, and have used the best arguments I could make them understand against the same: They have told me I should see the Devil at those times come to the party, but I assured my self and them of the contrary, which so proved: yea, them selves have confessed they never saw him when any of us were present. In desperate end extraordinary hard travel in childbirth, when the party cannot be delivered by the ordinary meals, they send for this Powah though ordinarily their travel is not so extreme as in our parts of the world, they being of a more hardy nature; for on the third day after child-birth I have scene the mother with the infant upon a small occasion in cold weather in a boat upon the Sea.

Many sacrifices the Indians use, and in some cases kill children. It seemeth they are various in their religious worship in a little distance, and grow more and more cold in their worship to Kiehtan; saying in their memory he was much more called upon. The Narragansetts exceed in their blind devotion, and have a great spacious house wherein only some few (that are as we may term them Priests) come: thither at certain known times resort all their people, and offer almost all the riches they have to their gods, as kettles, skins, hatchets, beads, knives, etc. all which are cast by the Priests into a great fire that they make in the midst of the house, and there consumed to ashes. To this offering every man bringeth freely, and the more he is known to bring, hath the better esteem of all men. This the other Indians about us approve of as good, and wish their Sachems would appoint the like: and because the plague hath not reigned at Narragansetts as at other places about them, they attribute to this custom there used.

The Pnieses are men of great courage and wisdom, and to these also the Devil appeareth more familiarly then to others, and as we conceive maketh covenant with them to preserve them from death, by wounds, with arrows, knives, hatchets, etc. or at least both themselves and especially the people think themselves to be freed from the same. And though against their batters all of them by painting disfigure themselves, yet they are known by their cottage and boldness, by reason whereof one of them will chase almost an hundred men, for they account it death for whomsoever stand in their way. These are highly esteemed of all sorts of people, and are of the Sachems Council, without whom they will not war or undertake any weighty business. In war their Sachems for their more safety go in the midst of them. They are commonly men of the greatest stature and strength, and such as will endure most hardness, and yet are more discreet, courteous, and humane in their carriages then any amongst them scorning theft, lying, and the like base dealings, and stand as much upon their reputation as any men.

And to the end they may have store of these, they train up the most forward and likeliest boys from their childhood in great hardness, and make them abstain from dainty meat, observing divers orders prescribed, to the end that when they are of age the Devil may appear to them, causing to drink the juice of Sentry and other bitter herbs till they cast, which they must disgorge into the platter, and drink again, and again, till at length through extraordinary oppressing of nature it will seem to be all blood, and this the boys will do with eagerness at the first, and so continue till by reason of faintness they can scarce stand on their legs, and then must go forth into the cold: also they beat their shins with sticks, and cause them to run through bushes, stumps, and brambles, to make them hardy and acceptable to the Devil, that in time he may appear unto them.

Their Sachems cannot be all called Kings, but only some few of them, to whom the rest resort for protection, and pay homage unto them, neither may they war without their knowledge and approbation, yet to be commanded by the greater as occasion serveth. Of this sort is Massasoit our friend, and Conanacus of Narragansett our supposed enemy.

Every Sachem taketh care for the widow and fatherless, also for such as are aged, and any way maimed, if their friends be dead or not able to provide for them.

A Sachem will not take any to wife but such an one as is equal to him in birth, otherwise they say their seed would in time become ignoble, and though they have many other wives, yet are they no other then concubines or servants, and yield a kind of obedience to the principal, who ordereth the family, and them in it. The like their men observe also, and will adhere to the first during their lives; but put away the other at their pleasure.

This government is successive and not by choice. If the father die before the son or daughter be of age, then the child is committed to the protection and tuition of some one amongst them, who ruleth in his stead till he be of age, but when that is I know not.

Every Sachem knoweth how far the bounds and limits of his own Country extendeth, and that is his own proper inheritance, out of that if any of his men desire land to set their come, he giveth them as much as they can use, and sets them their bounds. In this circuit whosoever hunteth, if they kill any venison, bring him his fee, which is the fore parts of the same, if it be killed on the land, but if in the water, then the skin thereof: The great Sachems or Kings, know their Own bounds or limits of land, as well as the rest.

All travelers or strangers for the most part lodge at the Sachems, when they come they tell them how long they will stay, and to what place they go, during which time they receive entertainment according to their persons, but want not.

Once a year the Pnieses use to provoke the people to bestow much come on the Sachem. To that end they appoint a certain time and place near the Sachems dwelling, where the people bring many baskets of come, and make a great stack thereof. There the Pnieses stand ready to give thanks to the people on the Sachems behalf, and after acquainteth the Sachems therewith, who fetcheth the same, and is no less thankful, bestowing many gifts on them.

When any are visited with sickness, their friends resort unto them for their comfort, and continue with them oft-times till their death or recovery. If they die they stay a certain time to mourn for them. Night and morning they perform this duty many days after the burial in a most doleful manner, insomuch as though it be ordinary and the note musical, which they take one from another, and all together, yet it will draw tears from their eyes, and almost from ours also. But if they recover then because their sickness was chargeable, they send come and other gifts unto them at a certain appointed time, whereat they feast and dance, which they call Commoco.

When they bury the dead they sow up the corps in a mat and so put it in the earth. If the party be a Sachem they cover him with many curious mats, and bury all his riches with him, and enclose the grave with a pale. If it be a child the father will also put his own most special jewels and ornaments in the earth with it, also will cut his hair and disfigure himself very much in token of sorrow. If it be the man or woman of the house, they will pull down the mattes and leave the frame standing, and bury them in or near the same, and either remove their dwelling or give over house-keeping.

The men employ themselves wholly in hunting, and other exercises of the bow, except at some times they take some pains in fishing.

The women live a most slavish life, they carry all their burdens, set and dress their come, gather it in, seek out for much of their food, beat and make ready the come to eat, and have all household care lying upon them.

The younger sort reverence the elder, and do all mean offices whilst they are together, although they be strangers. Boys and girls may not wear their hair like men and women, but are distinguished thereby. A man is not accounted a man till he do some notable act, or show forth such courage and resolution as becometh his place. The men take much tobacco, but for boys so to do they account it odious.

All their names are significant and variable, for when they come to the state of men and women, they alter them according to their deeds or dispositions.

When a maid taken in marriage sue first cutteth her hair, and after weareth a covering on her head till her hair be grown out. Their women are diversely disposed, some as modest as they will scarce talk one with another in the company of men, being very chaste also; yet other some light, lascivious and wanton.

If a woman have a bad husband, or cannot affect him, and there be war or opposition between that and any other people, she will run away from him to the contrary party and there live, where they never come unwelcome: for where are most women, there is greatest plenty.

When a woman hath her monthly terms she separateth herself from all other company, and liveth certain days in a house alone: after which she washeth her self and all that she hath touched or used, and is again received to her husbands bed or family.

For adultery the husband will beat his wife and put her away, if he please. Some common strumpets there are as well as in other places, but they are such as either never married, or widows, or put away for adultery: for no man will keep such an one to wife.

In matters of unjust and dishonest dealing the Sachem examineth and punisheth the same. In case of thefts, for the I first offense he is disgracefully rebuked, for the second beaten by the Sachem with a cudgel on the naked back, for the third he is beaten with many strokes, and hath his nose slit upward, that thereby all men may both know and shun him. If any man kill another, he must likewise die for the same. The Sachem not only passeth the sentence upon male-factors, but executeth the same with his own hands, if the party be then present; if not, sendeth his own knife in case of death, in the hands of others to perform the same. But if the offender be to receive other punishment, he will not receive the same but from the Sachem himself, before whom being naked he kneeleth, and will not offer to run away though he beat him never so much, it being a greater disparagement for a man to cry during the time of his correction, then is his offense and punishment.

As for their apparel they wear breeches and stockings in one like some Irish, which is made of Deer skins, and have shoes of the same leather. They wear also a Dears skin loose about them like a cloak, which they will turn to the weather side. In this habit they travel, but when they are at home or come to their journeys end, presently they pull off their breeches, stocking, and shoes, wring out the water if they be wet, and dry them, and rub or chafe the same. Though these be off, yet have they another small garment that covereth their secrets. The men wear also when they go abroad in cold weather an Otter or Fox skin on their right arm, but only their bracer on the left. Women and all of that sex wear strings about their legs, which the men never do.

The people are very ingenious and observative, they keep account of time by the moon, and winters or summers; they know diverse of the stars by name, in particular, they know the North-star and call it maske, which is to say the bear. Also they have many names for the winces. They will guess very well at the wince and weather before hand, by observations in the heavens. They report also, that some of them can cause the wince to blow in what part they list, can raise storms and tempests which they usually do when they intend the death or destruction of other people, that by reason of the unseasonable weather they may take advantage of their enemies in their houses. At such times they perform their greatest exploits, and in such seasons when they are at enmity with any, they keep more careful watch then at other times.

As for the language it is very copious, large, and difficult, as yet we cannot attain to any great measure thereof; but can understand them, and explain our selves to their understanding, by the help of those that daily converse with us. And though there be difference in an hundred miles distance of place, both in language and manners, yet not so much but that they very well understand each other. And thus much of their lives and manners.

Instead of Records and Chronicles, they take this course, where any remarkable act is done, in memory of it, either in the place, or by some path-way near adjoining, they make a round hole in the ground about a foot deep, and as much over, which when others passing by behold, they inquire the cause and occasion of the same, which being once known, they are careful to acquaint all men, as occasion serveth therewith. And least such holes should be filled, or grown up by any accident, as men pass by they will oft renew the same: By which means many things of great Antiquity are fresh in memory. So that as a man travelleth, if he can understand his guide, his journey will be the less tedious, by reason of the many historical Discourses will be related unto him. 
 In all this it may be said, I have neither praised nor dispraised the Country: and since I lived so long therein, my judgment thereof will give no less satisfaction to them that know me, then the Relation of our proceedings. To which I answer, that as in one so of the other, I will speak as sparingly as I can, yet will make known what I conceive thereof.

And first for that Continent, on which we are called New England, although it hath ever been conceived by the English to be a part of that main Land adjoining to Virginia, yet by relation of the Indians it should appear to be otherwise: for they affirm confidently, that it is an Island, and that either the Dutch or French pass through from Sea to Sea, between us and Virginia, and drive a great Trade in the same. The name of that inlet of the Sea they call Monhiggan, which I take to be the same which we call Hudson's River, up which Master Hudson went many Leagues, and for want of means (as I hear) left it undiscovered. For confirmation of this, their opinion is thus much; Though Virginia be not above an hundred and fifty Leagues from us, yet they never heard of Powhattan, or knew that any English were planted in his Country, save only by us and Tisquantum, who went in an English Ship thither: And therefore it is the more probable, because the water is not passable for them, who are very adventurous in their Boats.

Then for the temperature of the air, in almost three years experience, I can scarce distinguish New England from Old England, in respect of heat, and cold, frost, snow, rain, winds, etc. Some object, because our Plantation lieth in the latitude of 42. it must needs be much hotter. I confess, I cannot give the reason of the contrary; only experience teacheth us, that if it do exceed England, it is so little as must require better judgments to discern it. And for the Winter, I rather think (if there be difference) it is both sharper and longer in New England then Old; and yet the want of those comforts in the one which I have enjoyed in the other, may deceive my judgment also. But in my best observation, comparing our own condition with the Relations of other parts of America, I cannot conceive of any to agree better with the constitution of the English, not being oppressed with extremity of heat, nor nipped with biting cold, by which means, blessed be God, we enjoy our health, notwithstanding, those difficulties we have undergone, in such a measure as would have been admired, if we had lived in England with the like means. The day is two hours longer then here when it is at the shortest, and as much shorter there, when it is at the longest.

The soil is variable, in some places mould, in some clay, others, a mixed sand, etc. The chiefest grain is the Indian Maize, or Guinea-Wheat; the seed-time beginneth in midst of April, and continueth good till the midst of May. Our harvest beginneth with September. This come increaseth in great measure, but is inferior in quantity to the same in Virginia, the reason I conceive, is because Virginia is far hotter then it is with us, it requiring great heat to ripen; but whereas it is objected against New England, that Corn will not there grow, except the ground be manured with fish? I answer, That where men set with fish (as with us) it is more easy so to do then to clear ground and set without some five or six years, and so begin anew, as in Virginia and else-where. Not but that in some places, where they cannot be taken with ease in such abundance, the Indians set four years together without, and have as good Corn or better then we have that set with them, though indeed I think if we had Cattle to till the ground, it would be more profitable and better agreeable to the soil, to sow Wheat, Rye, Barley, Peas, and Oats, then to set Mays, which our Indians call ewachim: for we have had experience that they like and thrive well; and the other will not be procured without good labor and diligence, especially at seed-time, when it must also be watched by night to keep the Wolves from the fish, till it be rotten, which will be in fourteen days; yet men agreeing together, and taking their turns it is not much.

Much might be spoken of the benefit that may come to such as shall here plant by Trade with the Indians for Furs, if men take a right course for obtaining the same, for I dare presume upon that small experience I have had, to affirm, that the English, Dutch, and French, returnee yearly many thousand pounds profits by Trade only from that Island, on which we are seated.

Tobacco may be there planted, but not with that profit as in some other places, neither were it profitable there to follow it, though the increase were equal, because fish is a better and richer Commodity, and more necessary, which may be and are there had in as great abundance as in any other part of the world; Witness the West-country Merchants of England, which returnee incredible gains yearly from thence.

And if they can so do which here buy their salt at a great charge, and transport more Company to make their voyage, then will sail their Ships, what may the planters expect when once they are seated, and make the most of their salt there, and employ themselves at lest eight months in fishing, whereas the other fish but four, and have their ship lie dead in the harbor all the time, whereas such shipping as belong to plantations, may take freight of passengers or cattle thither, and have their lading provided against they come. I confess, we have come so far short of the means to raise such returnee, as with great difficulty we have preserved our lives; insomuch, as when I look back upon our condition, and weak means to preserve the same, I rather admire at Gods mercy and providence in our preservation, then that no greater things have been effected by us. But though our beginning have been thus raw, small, and difficult, as thou hast scene, yet the same God that hath hitherto led us through the former, I hope will raise means to accomplish the latter. Not that we altogether, or principally propound profit to be the main end of that we have undertaken, but the glory of God, and the honor of our Country, in the enlarging of his Majesties Dominions, yet wanting outward means, to set things in that forwardness we desire, and to further the latter by the former, I thought meet to offer both to consideration, hoping that where Religion and profit jump together (which is rare) in so honorable an action, it will encourage every honest man, either in person or purse, to set forward the same, or at least-wise to commend the well-fare thereof in his daily prayers to the blessing of the blessed God.

I will not again speak of the abundance of fowl, store of Venison, and variety of Fish, in their seasons, which might encourage many to go in their persons, only I advise all such before hand to consider, that as they hear of Countries that abound with the good creatures of God, so means must be used for the taking of every one in his kind, and therefore not only to content themselves that there is sufficient, but to foresee how they shall be able to obtain the same, otherwise, as he that walketh London streets, though he be in the midst of plenty, yet if he want means, is not the better but hath rather his sorrow increased by the sight of that he wanteth, and cannot enjoy it: so also there, if thou want art and other necessaries hereunto belonging, thou maist see that thou wantest, and thy heart desireth, and yet be never the better for the same. Therefore if thou see shine own insufficiency of thy self, then join to some others, where thou maiest in some measure enjoy the same, otherwise assure thy self, thou art better where thou art. Some there be that thinking altogether of their present wants they enjoy here, and not dreaming of any there, through indiscretion plunge themselves into a deeper sea of misery. As for example, it may be here, rent and firing are so chargeable, as without great difficulty a man cannot accomplish the same; never considering, that as he shall have no rent to pay, so he must build his house before he have it, and peradventure may with more ease pay for his fuel here, then cut and fetch it home, if he have not cattle to draw it there; though there is no scarcity but rather too great plenty.

I write not these things to dissuade any that shall seriously upon due examination set themselves to further the glory of God, and the honor of our Country, in so worthy an enterprise, but rather to discourage such as with too great lightness undertake such courses, who peradventure strain themselves and their friends for their passage thither, and are no sooner there, then seeing their foolish imagination made void, are at their wits end, and would give ten times so much for their returnee, if they could procure it, and out of such discontented passions and humors, spare not to lay that imputation upon the Country, and others, which themselves deserve. As for example, I have heard some complain of others for their large reports of New England, and yet because they must drink water and want many delicates they here enjoyed, could presently returnee with their mouths full of clamors. And can any be so simple as to conceive that the fountains should stream forth Wine, or Bear, or the woods and rivers be like Butchers-shops, or fish-mongers stalls, where they might have things taken to their hands. If thou canst not live without such things, and hast no means to procure the one, and wilt not take pains for the other, nor hast ability to employ others for thee, rest where thou art: for as a proud heart, a dainty tooth, a beggar's purse, and an idle hand, be here intolerable, so that person that hath these qualities there, is much more abominable. If therefore God hath given thee a heart to undertake such courses, upon such grounds as bear thee out in all difficulties, viz., his glory as a principal, and all other outward good things but as accessories, which peradventure thou shalt enjoy, and it may be not: then thou wilt with true comfort and thankfulness receive the least of his mercies; whereas on the contrary, men deprive themselves of much happiness, being senseless of greater blessings, and through prejudice mother up the love and bounty of God, whose name be ever glorified in us, and by us, now and evermore. Amen.

A Postscript.

If any man desire a more ample relation of the State of this Country, before such time as this present relation taketh place, I refer them to the two former printed books. The one published by the President and Council for New England, and the other gathered by the Inhabitants of this present Plantation at Plymouth in New England: Both which books are to be sold by John Bellamy, at his shop at the three golden Lions in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 


Porque, cristianísimos y muy altos y muy excelentes y muy poderosos Príncipes, Rey y Reina de las Españas y de las islas de la mar, Nuestros Señores, este presente año de 1492, después de Vuestras Altezas haber dado fin a la guerra de los moros que reinaban en Europa y haber acabado la guerra en la muy grande ciudad de Granada, adonde este presente año a dos días del mes de enero por fuerza de armas vi poner las banderas reales de Vuestras Altezas en las torres de la Alhambra, que es la fortaleza de la dicha ciudad y vi salir al rey moro a las puertas de la ciudad y besar las reales manos de Vuestras Altezas y del Príncipe mi Señor, y luego en aquel presente mes, por la información que yo había dado a Vuestras Altezas de las tierras de India y de un Príncipe llamado Gran Can (que quiere decir en nuestro romance Rey de los Reyes), como muchas veces él y sus antecesores habían enviado a Roma a pedir doctores en nuestra santa fe porque le enseñasen en ella, y que nunca el Santo Padre le había proveído y se perdían tantos pueblos creyendo en idolatrías o recibiendo en sí sectas de perdición, Vuestras Altezas, como católicos cristianos y Príncipes amadores de la santa fe cristiana y acrecentadores de ella, y enemigos de la secta de Mahoma y de todas idolatrías y herejías, pensaron de enviarme a mí, Cristóbal Colón, a las dichas partidas de India para ver a los dichos príncipes, y los pueblos y tierras y la disposición de ellas y de todo, y la manera que se pudiera tener para la conversión de ellas a nuestra santa fe; y ordenaron que yo no fuese por tierra al Oriente, por donde se acostumbra de andar, salvo por el camino de Occidente, por donde hasta hoy no sabemos por cierta fe que haya pasado nadie. Así que, después de haber echado fuera todos los judíos de vuestros reinos y señoríos en el mismo mes de enero mandaron Vuestras Altezas a mí que con armada suficiente me fuese a las dichas partidas de India; y para ello me hicieron grandes mercedes y me ennoblecieron que dende en adelante yo me llamase Don, y fuese Almirante Mayor de la Mar Océana y Virrey y Gobernador perpetuo de todas las islas y tierra firme que yo descubriese y ganase, y de aquí en adelante se descubriesen y ganasen en la Mar Océana, y así me sucediese mi hijo mayor, y así de grado en grado para siempre jamás. Y partí yo de la ciudad de Granada a doce días del mes de mayo del mismo año de 1492, en sábado. Vine a la villa de Palos, que es puerto de mar, adonde armé yo tres navíos muy aptos para semejante hecho, y partí del dicho puerto muy abastecido de muy muchos mantenimientos y de mucha gente de la mar, a tres días del mes de agosto del dicho año, en un viernes, antes de la salida del sol con media hora, y llevé el camino de las islas de Canaria de Vuestras Altezas, que son en la dicha Mar Océana, para de allí tomar mi derrota y navegar tanto que yo llegase a las Indias, y dar la embajada de Vuestras Altezas a aquellos Príncipes y cumplir lo que así me habían mandado; y para esto pensé de escribir todo este viaje muy puntualmente de día en día todo lo que hiciese y viese y pasase, como adelante se vera. También, Señores Príncipes, allende de escribir cada noche lo que el día pasare, y el día lo que la noche navegare, tengo propósito de hacer carta nueva de navegar, en la cual situaré toda la mar y tierras del Mar Océano en sus propios lugares, debajo su viento, y más, componer un libro, y poner todo por el semejante por pintura, por latitud del equinoccial y longitud del Occidente; y sobre todo cumple mucho que yo olvide el sueño y tiente mucho el navegar, porque así cumple, las cuales serán gran trabajo.
Viernes, 3 de agosto
Partimos viernes tres días de agosto de 1492 de la barra de Saltés, a las ocho horas. Anduvimos con fuerte virazón hasta el poner del sol hacia el Sur sesenta millas, que son quince leguas; después al Sudoeste y al Sur cuarta del Sudoeste, que era el camino para las Canarias.
Sábado, 4 de agosto
Anduvieron al Sudoeste cuarta del Sur.
Domingo, 5 de agosto
Anduvieron su vía entre día y noche más de cuarenta leguas.
Lunes, 6 de agosto
Saltó o desencajóse el gobernario a la carabela Pinta, donde iba Martín Alonso Pinzón, a lo que se creyó y sospechó por industria de un Gómez Rascón y Cristóbal Quintero, cuya era la carabela, porque le pesaba ir en aquel viaje; y dice el Almirante que antes de que partiese habían hallado en ciertos reveses y grisquetas como dicen, a los dichos. Viose allí el Almirante en gran turbación por no poder ayudar a la dicha carabela sin su peligro, y dice que alguna pena perdía con saber que Martín Alonso Pinzón era persona esforzada y de buen ingenio. En fin, anduvieron entre día y noche veintinueve leguas.
Martes, 7 de agosto
Tornóse a saltar el gobernalle a la Pinta, y adobáronlo y anduvieron en demanda de la isla del Lanzarote, que es una de las islas de Canarias, y anduvieron entre día y noche veinticinco leguas.
Miércoles, 8 de agosto
Hubo entre los pilotos de las tres carabelas opiniones diversas dónde estaban, y el Almirante salió más verdadero; y quisiera ir a Gran Canaria por dejar la carabela Pinta, porque iba mal acondicionada del gobernario y hacía agua, y quisiera tomar allí otra si la hallara. No pudieron tomarla aquel día.
Jueves, 9 de agosto
Hasta el domingo en la noche no pudo el Almirante tomar la Gomera, y Martín Alonso quedóse en aquella costa de Gran Canaria por mandado del Almirante, porque no podía navegar. Después tornó el Almirante a Canaria, y adobaron muy bien la Pinta con mucho trabajo y diligencias del Almirante, de Martín Alonso y de los demás; y al cabo vinieron a la Gomera. Vieron salir gran fuego de la sierra de la isla de Tenerife, que es muy alta en gran manera. Hicieron la Pinta redonda, porque era latina ; tornó a la Gomera domingo a dos de septiembre con la Pinta adobada.
Dice el Almirante que juraban muchos hombres honrados españoles que en la Gomera estaban con doña Inés Peraza, madre de Guillén Peraza, que después fue el primer Conde de la Gomera, que eran vecinos de la isla de Hierro, que cada año veían tierra al Oeste de las Canarias, que es al Poniente; y otros de la Gomera afirmaban otro tanto con juramento. Dice aquí el Almirante que se acuerda que estando en Portugal el año 1484 vino uno de la isla de Madera al Rey a le pedir una carabela para ir a esta tierra que veía, la cual juraba que cada año la veía y siempre de una manera. Y también dice que se acuerda que lo mismo decían en las islas de los Azores y todos éstos en una derrota y en una manera de señal y en una grandeza.Tomada, pues, agua y leña y carnes y lo demás que tenían los hombres que dejó en la Gomera el Almirante cuando fue a la isla de Canaria a adobar la carabela Pinta, finalmente se hizo a la vela de la dicha isla de la Gomera con sus tres carabelas jueves a seis días de septiembre.
Jueves, 6 de septiembre
Partió aquel día por la mañana del puerto de la Gomera y tomó la vuelta para ir a su viaje. Y supo el Almirante de una carabela que venía de la isla del Hierro que andaban por allí tres carabelas de Portugal para lo tomar: debía ser la envidia que el Rey tenía por haberse ido a Castilla. Y anduvo todo aquel día y noche en calma, y a la mañana se halló entre la Gomera y Tenerife.
Viernes, 7 de septiembre
Todo el viernes y el sábado, hasta tres horas de noche, estuvo en calma.
Sábado, 8 de septiembre
Tres horas de noche sábado comenzó a ventear Nordeste, y tomó su vía y camino al Oeste.Tuvo mucha mar por proa. que le estorbaba el camino; y andaría aquel día nueve leguas con su noche.
Domingo, 9 de septiembre
Anduvo aquel día diecinueve leguas, y acordó contar menos de las que andaba, porque si el viaje fuese luengo no se espantase y desmayase la gente. En la noche anduvo ciento veinte millas; a diez millas por hora, que son treinta leguas. Los marineros gobernaban mal, decayendo sobre la cuarta del Nordeste, y aun a la media partida: sobre lo cual les riñó el Almirante muchas veces.
Lunes, 10 de septiembre
En aquel día con su noche anduvo sesenta leguas, a diez millas por hora 21, que son dos leguas y media; pero no contaba sino cuarenta y ocho leguas, porque no se asombrase la gente si el viaje fuese largo.
Martes, 11 de septiembre
Aquel día navegaron a su vía, que era el Oeste, y anduvieron veinte leguas y más, y vieron un gran trozo de mástil de nao, de ciento y veinte toneles, y no lo pudieron tomar. La noche anduvieron cerca de veinte leguas, y contó no más de dieciséis por la causa dicha.
Miércoles, 12 de septiembre
Aquel día, yendo su vía, anduvieron en noche y día treinta y tres leguas, contando menos por la dicha causa.
Jueves, 13 de septiembre
Aquel día con su noche, yendo a su vía, que era al Oeste, anduvieron treinta y tres leguas, y contaba tres o cuatro menos. Las corrientes le eran contrarias. En este día, al comienzo de la noche, las agujas noroesteaban, y a la mañana noroesteaban algún tanto.
Viernes, 14 de septiembre
Navegaron aquel día su camino al Oeste con su noche y anduvieron veinte leguas; contó alguna menos. Aquí dijeron los de la carabela Niña que había visto un garjao y un rabo de junco; y estas aves nunca se apartan de tierra, cuando más, veinticinco leguas.
Sábado, 15 de septiembre
Navegó aquel día con su noche veintisiete leguas su camino al Oeste y algunas más. Y en esta noche al principio de ella vieron caer del cielo un maravilloso ramo de fuego en la mar, lejos de ellos cuatro o cinco leguas
Domingo, 16 de septiembre
Navegó aquel día y la noche a su camino al Oeste. Andarían treinta y nueve leguas, pero no contó sino treinta y seis. Tuvo aquel día algunos nublados, lloviznó. Dice aquí el Almirante que hoy y siempre de allí adelante hallaron aires temperantísimos, que era placer grande el gusto de las mañanas, que no faltaba sino oír ruiseñores. Dice él: «y era el tiempo como por abril en el Andalucía». Aquí comenzaron a ver muchas manadas de hierba muy verde que poco había, según le parecía, que se había desapegado de tierra, por lo cual todos juzgaban que estaban cerca de alguna isla; pero no de tierra firme, según el Almirante, que dice: «porque la tierra firme hago más adelante».
Lunes, 17 de septiembre
Navegó a su camino al Oeste, y andarían en día y noche cincuenta leguas y más. No asentó sino cuarenta y siete. Ayudábales la corriente. Vieron mucha hierba y muy a menudo, y era hierba de peñas, y venía la hierba de hacia Poniente. Juzgaban estar cerca de tierra.
Tomaron los pilotos el Norte marcándolo, y hallaron que las agujas noroesteaban una gran cuarta, y temían los marineros y estaban penados y no decían de qué. Conociólo el Almirante; mandó que tornasen a marcar el Norte en amaneciendo, y hallaron que estaban buenas las agujas. La causa fue porque la estrella que parece hace movimiento, y no las agujas. En amaneciendo, aquel lunes, vieron muchas más hierbas y que parecían hierbas de ríos, en las cuales hallaron un cangrejo vivo, el cual guardó el Almirante. Y dice que aquellas fueron señales ciertas de tierra, porque no se hallan ochenta leguas de tierra. El agua de la mar hallaban menos salada desde que salieron de las Canarias; los aires siempre más suaves. Iban muy alegres todos y los navíos quien más podía andar andaba por ver primero tierra. Vieron muchas toninas, y los de la Niña mataron una. Dice aquí el Almirante que aquellas señales eran del Poniente, «donde espero en aquel alto Dios, en cuyas manos están todas las victorias, que muy presto nos dará tierra». En aquella mañana dice que vio un ave blanca que se llama rabo de junco que no suele dormir en la mar.
Martes, 18 de septiembre
Navegó aquel día con su noche, y andarían más de cincuenta y cinco leguas, pero no asentó sino cuarenta y ocho. Llevaba todos estos días mar muy bonanza, como en el río de Sevilla. Este día Martín Alonso, con la Pinta, que era gran velera, no esperó, porque dijo al Almirante desde su carabela que había visto gran multitud de aves ir hacia el Poniente, y que aquella noche esperaba ver tierra y por eso andaba tanto. Apareció a la parte del Norte una gran cerrazón, que es señal de estar sobre la tierra.
Miércoles, 19 de septiembre
Navegó su camino, y entre día y noche andarían veinticinco leguas, porque tuvieron calma. Escribió veintidós. Este día a las diez horas, vino a la nao un alcatraz, y a la tarde vieron otro, que no suele apartarse veinte leguas de tierra. Vinieron unos llovizneros sin viento, lo que es señal cierta de tierra. No quiso detenerse barloventeando el Almirante para averiguar si había tierra; más de que tuvo por cierto que a la banda del Norte y del Sur había algunas islas, como la verdad lo estaban, y él iba por medio de ellas. Porque su voluntad era de seguir adelante hasta las Indias, «y el tiempo es bueno, porque placiendo a Dios a la vuelta se vería todo»; éstas son sus palabras... Aquí descubrieron sus puntos los pilotos: el de la Niña se hallaba de las Canarias a cuatrocientas cuarenta leguas; el de la Pinta, a cuatrocientas veinte; el de la donde iba el Almirante, a cuatrocientas justas.
Jueves, 20 de septiembre
Navegó este día al Oeste cuarta del Noroeste y a la media partida, porque se mudaron muchos vientos con la calma que había. Andarían hasta siete u ocho leguas. Vinieron a la nao dos alcatraces y después otro, que fue señal de estar cerca de tierra; y vieron mucha hierba, aunque el día pasado no habían visto de ella. Tomaron un pájaro, con la mano, que era como un garjao; era pájaro de río y no de mar: los pies tenía como gaviota. Vinieron al navío, en amaneciendo, dos o tres pajaritos de tierra cantando, y después, antes del sol salido, desaparecieron. Después vino un alcatraz: venía del Oesnoroeste; iba al Sudeste, que era señal que dejaba la tierra al Oesnoroeste, porque estas aves duermen en tierra y por la mañana van a la mar a buscar su vida, y no se alejan veinte leguas.
Viernes, 21 de septiembre
Aquel día fue todo lo más calma y después algún viento. Andarían entre día y noche, de ello a la vía y de ello no, hasta trece leguas. En amaneciendo, hallaron tanta hierba que parecía ser la mar cuajada de ella, y venía del Oeste. Vieron un alcatraz. La mar muy llana como un río y los aires los mejores del mundo. Vieron una ballena, que es señal de que estaban cerca de tierra, porque siempre andan cerca
Sábado, 22 de septiembre
Navegó al Oesnoroeste más o menos, acostándose a una y otra parte. Andarían treinta leguas. No veían casi hierba. Vieron unas pardelas y otra ave. Dice aquí el Almirante: «Mucho me fue necesario este viento contrario, porque mi gente andaban muy estimulados, que pensaban que no ventaban estos mares vientos para volver a España. Por un pedazo de día no hubo hierba; después, muy espesa.
Domingo, 23 de septiembre
Navegó al Noroeste y a las veces a la cuarta del Norte y a las veces a su camino, que era el Oeste; y andaría hasta veintidós leguas. Vieron una tórtola, y un alcatraz y otro pajarito de río y otras aves blancas. Las hierbas eran muchas, y hallaban cangrejos en ellas. Y como la mar estuviese mansa y llana, murmuraba la gente diciendo: que pues por allí no había mar grande, que nunca ventaría para volver a España; pero después alzóse mucho la mar y sin viento, que los asombraba, por lo cual dice aquí el Almirante: "Así que muy necesario me fue la mar alta, que no pareció salvo el tiempo de los judíos cuando salieron de Egipto contra Moisén, que los sacaba de cautiverio."
Lunes, 24 de septiembre
Navegó a su camino al Oeste día y noche, y andarían catorce leguas y media. Contó doce. Vino al navío un alcatraz y vieron muchas pardelas.
Martes, 25 de septiembre
Este día hubo mucha calma, y después ventó; y fueron su camino al Oeste hasta la noche. Iba hablando el Almirante con Martín Alonso Pinzón, capitán de la otra carabela Pinta, sobre una carta que le había enviado tres días hacía a la carabela, donde según parece tenía pintadas el Almirante ciertas islas por aquella mar. Y decía Martín Alonso que estaban en aquella comarca, y decía el Almirante que así le parecía a él; pero puesto que no hubiesen dado con ellas, lo debían de haber causado las corrientes que siempre habían echado los navíos al Nordeste, y que no habían andado tanto como los pilotos decían. Y, estando en esto, dijo el Almirante que le enviase la carta dicha. Y, enviada con alguna cuerda, comenzó el Almirante a cartear en ella con su piloto y marineros. Al sol puesto, subió el Martín Alonso en la popa de su navío, y con mucha alegría llamó al Almirante, pidiéndole albricias que veía tierra. Y cuando se lo oyó decir con afirmación, el Almirante dice que se echó a dar gracias a Nuestro Señor de rodillas, y el Martín Alonso decía Gloria in excelsis Deo con su gente. Lo mismo hizo la gente del Almirante; y los de la Niña subiéronse todos sobre el mástil y en la jarcia, y todos afirmaron que era tierra. Y al Almirante así pareció y que habría a ella veinticinco leguas. Estuvieron hasta la noche afirmando todos ser tierra. Mandó el Almirante dejar su camino, que era el Oeste, y que fuesen todos al Sudoeste, adonde había parecido la tierra. Habrían andado aquel día al Oeste cuatro leguas y media, y en la noche al Sudoeste diecisiete leguas, que son veintiuna, puesto que decía a la gente trece leguas porque siempre fingía a la gente que hacía poco camino porque no les pareciese largo; por manera que escribió por dos caminos aquel viaje, el menor fue el fingido, y el mayor el verdadero. Anduvo la mar muy llana, por lo cual se echaron a nadar muchos marineros. Vieron muchos dorados y otros peces.
Miércoles, 26 de septiembre
Navegó a su camino al Oeste hasta después de medio día. De allí fueron al Sudoeste hasta conocer que lo que decían que había sido tierra no lo era, sino cielo. Anduvieron día y noche treinta y una leguas, y contó a la gente veinticuatro. La mar era como un río, los aires dulces y suavísimos.
Jueves, 27 de septiembre
Navegó a su vía al Oeste. Anduvo entre día y noche veinticuatro leguas; contó a la gente veinte leguas. Vinieron muchos dorados; mataron uno. Vieron un rabo de junco.
Viernes, 28 de septiembre
Navegó a su camino al Oeste, anduvieron día y noche con calma catorce leguas; contaron trece. Hallaron poca hierba; tomaron dos peces dorados, y en los otros navíos más.
Sábado, 29 de septiembre
Navegó a su camino al Oeste. Anduvieron veinticuatro leguas; contó a la gente veintiuna. Por calmas que tuvieron, anduvieron entre día y noche poco. Vieron un ave que se llamaba rabihorcado, que hace vomitar a los alcatraces lo que comen para comerlo ella, y no se mantiene de otra cosa. Es ave de la mar, pero no posa en la mar ni se aparta de tierra veinte leguas. Hay de éstas muchas en las islas de Cabo Verde. Después vinieron dos alcatraces. Los aires eran muy dulces y sabrosos, que dice que no faltaba sino oir al ruiseñor, y la mar llana como un río. Parecieron después en tres veces tres alcatraces y un horcado. Vieron mucha hierba.
Domingo, 30 de septiembre
Navegó su camino al Oeste. Anduvo entre día y noche, por las calmas, catorce leguas; contó once. Vinieron al navío cuatro rabos de junco, que es gran señal de tierra, porque tantas aves de una naturaleza juntas es señal que no andan desmandadas ni perdidas. Viéronse cuatro alcatraces en dos veces. Hierba, mucha. Nota: Que las estrellas que se llaman las Guardas, cuando anochece, están junto al brazo de la parte del Poniente, y cuando amanece están en la línea debajo del brazo al Nordeste, que parece que en toda la noche no andan salvo tres líneas, que son nueve horas, y esto cada noche: esto dice aquí el Almirante. También en anocheciendo las agujas noroestean una cuarta, y en amaneciendo están con la estrella justo; por lo cual parece que la estrella hace movimiento como las otras estrellas, y las agujas piden siempre la verdad.
Lunes, 1 de octubre
Navegó su camino al Oeste. Anduvieron veinticinco leguas; contó a la gente veinte leguas. Tuvieron grande aguacero. El piloto del Almirante tenía hoy, en amaneciendo, que habían andado desde la isla de Hierro hasta aquí quinientas sesenta y ocho leguas al Oeste. La cuenta menor que el Almirante mostraba a la gente eran quinientas ochenta y cuatro leguas; pero la verdadera que el Almirante juzgaba y guardaba eran setecientas siete.
Martes, 2 de octubre
Navegó su camino al Oeste noche y día treinta y nueve leguas, contó a la gente obra de treinta leguas. La mar, llana y buena siempre. «A Dios muchas gracias sean dadas», dijo aquí el Almirante. Hierba venía del Este al Oeste, por el contrario de lo que solía: parecieron muchos peces; matóse uno. Vieron un ave blanca que parecía gaviota.
Miércoles, 3 de octubre
Navegó su vía ordinaria. Anduvieron cuarenta y siete leguas; contó a la gente cuarenta leguas. Aparecieron pardelas, hierba mucha, alguna muy vieja y otra muy fresca, y traía como fruta; y no vieron aves algunas. Creía el Almirante que le quedaban atrás las islas que traía pintadas en su carta. Dice aquí el Almirante que no se quiso detener barloventeando la semana pasada y estos días que había tantas señales de tierra, aunque tenía noticia de ciertas islas en aquella comarca, por no se detener, pues su fin era pasar a las Indias; y si se detuviera, dice él, que no fuera buen seso.
Jueves, 4 de octubre
Navegó a su camino al Oeste. Anduvieron entre día y noche sesenta y tres leguas; contó a la gente cuarenta y seis leguas. Vinieron al navío más de cuarenta pardelas juntos y dos alcatraces, y al uno dio una pedrada un mozo de la carabela. Vino a la nao un rabihorcado y una blanca como gaviota.
Viernes, 5 de octubre
Navegó a su camino. Andarían once millas por hora. Por la noche y día andarían cincuenta y siete leguas, porque aflojó la noche algo el viento; contó a su gente cuarenta y cinco. La mar en bonanza y llana. «A Dios -dice- muchas gracias sean dadas.» El aire muy dulce y templado, hierba ninguna, aves pardelas muchas, peces golondrinas volaron en la nao muchos.
Sábado, 6 de octubre
Navegó su camino al Oeste o Güeste, que es lo mismo. Anduvieron cuarenta leguas entre día y noche; contó a la gente treinta y tres leguas. Esta noche dijo Martín Alonso que sería bien navegar a la cuarta del Oeste, a la parte del Sudoeste; y al Almirante pareció que no decía esto Martín Alonso por la isla de Cipango, y el Almirante veía que si la erraban que no pudieran tan presto tomar tierra y que era mejor una vez ir a la tierra firme y después a las islas.
Domingo, 7 de octubre
Navegó a su camino al Oeste; anduvieron doce millas por hora dos horas, y después ocho millas por hora; y andaría hasta una hora de sol veintitrés leguas. Contó a la gente dieciocho. En este día, al levantar el sol, la carabela Niña, que iba delante por ser velera, y andaban quien más podía por ver primero tierra, por gozar de la merced que los Reyes a quien primero la viese habían prometido, levantó una bandera en el topo del mástil y tiró una lombarda por señal que veían tierra, porque así lo había ordenado el Almirante. Tenía también ordenado que al salir del sol y al ponerse se juntasen todos los navíos con él, porque estos dos tiempos son más propios para que los humores den más lugar a ver más lejos. Como en la tarde no viesen tierra, la que pensaban los de la carabela Niña que habían visto, y porque pasaban gran multitud de aves de la parte del Norte al Sudoeste (por lo cual era de creer que se iban a dormir a tierra o huían quizá del invierno, que en las tierras de donde venían debía de querer venir, porque sabía el Almirante que las más de las islas que tienen los portugueses por las aves las descubrieron), por esto el Almirante acordó dejar el camino del Oeste y poner la proa hacia Oessudoeste, con determinación de andar dos días por aquella vía. Esto comenzó antes una hora del sol puesto. Andarían en toda la noche obra de cinco leguas, y veintitrés del día. Fueron por todas veintiocho leguas noche y día.
Lunes, 8 de octubre
Navegó al Oessudoeste y andarían entre día y noche once leguas y media o doce, y a ratos parece que anduvieron en la noche quince millas por hora, si no está mentirosa la letra. Tuvieron la mar como el río de Sevilla; gracias a Dios, dice el Almirante. Los aires muy dulces como en abril en Sevilla, que es placer estar a ellos: tan olorosos son. Pareció la hierba muy fresca; muchos pajaritos del campo, y tomaron uno que iba huyendo al Sudoeste, grajaos y ánades y un alcatraz.
Martes, 9 de octubre
Navegó al Sudoeste. Anduvo cinco leguas; mudóse el viento y corrió al Oeste cuarta al Noroeste, y anduvo cuatro leguas. Después con todas once leguas de día y a la noche veinte leguas y media. Contó a la gente diecisiete leguas. Toda la noche oyeron pasar pájaros.
Miércoles, 10 de octubre
Navegó al Oessudoeste. Anduvieron a diez millas por hora y a ratos doce y algún rato a siete, y entre día y noche cincuenta y nueve leguas. Contó a la gente cuarenta y cuatro leguas no más. Aquí la gente ya no lo podía sufrir: quejábase del largo viaje. Pero el Almirante los esforzó lo mejor que pudo, dándoles buena esperanza de los provechos que podrían haber. Y añadía que por demás era quejarse, pues que él había venido a las Indias, y que así lo había de proseguir hasta hallarlas con la ayuda de Nuestro Señor.
Jueves, 11 de octubre
Navegó al Oessudoeste. Tuvieron mucha mar y más que en todo el viaje habían tenido. Vieron pardelas y un junco verde junto a la nao. Vieron los de la carabela Pinta una caña y un palo y tomaron otro palillo labrado a lo que parecía con hierro, y un pedazo de caña y otra hierba que nace en tierra, y una tablilla. Los de la carabela Niña también vieron otras señales de tierra y un palillo cargado de escaramujos. Con estas señales respiraron y alegráronse todos. Anduvieron en este día, hasta puesto el sol, veintisiete leguas.
Después del sol puesto, navegó a su primer camino, al Oeste; andarían doce millas cada hora y hasta dos horas después de media noche andarían noventa millas, que son veintidós leguas y media. Y porque la carabela Pinta era más velera e iba delante del Almirante, halló tierra e hizo las señas que el Almirante había mandado. Esta tierra vio primero un marinero que se decía Rodrigo de Triana; puesto que el Almirante, a las diez de la noche, estando en el castillo de popa, vio lumbre, aunque fue cosa tan cerrada que no quiso afirmar que fuese tierra; pero llamó a Pero Gutiérrez, repostero de estrados del Rey, y díjole que parecía lumbre, que mirase él, y así lo hizo y viola; díjole también a Rodrigo Sánchez de Segovia, que el Rey y la Reina enviaban en el armada por veedor, el cual no vio nada porque no estaba en lugar do la pudiese ver. Después de que el Almirante lo dijo, se vio una vez o dos, y era como una candelilla de cera que se alzaba y levantaba, lo cual a pocos pareciera ser indicio de tierra. Pero el Almirante tuvo por cierto estar junto a la tierra. Por lo cual, cuando dijeron la Salve, que la acostumbraban decir y cantar a su manera todos los marineros y se hallan todos, rogó y amonestólos el Almirante que hiciesen buena guarda al castillo de proa, y mirasen bien por la tierra, y que al que le dijese primero que veía tierra le daría luego un jubón de seda, sin las otras mercedes que los Reyes habían prometido, que eran diez mil maravedís de juro a quien primero la viese. A las dos horas después de media noche pareció la tierra de la cual estarían dos leguas Amañaron todas las velas, y quedaron con el treo, que es la vela grande sin bonetas, y pusiéronse a la corda, temporizando hasta el día viernes, que llegaron a una islita de los Lucayos, que se llamaba en lengua de indios Guanahaní. Luego vinieron gente desnuda, y el Almirante salió a tierra en la barca armada, y Martín Alonso Pinzón y Vicente Yáñez, su hermano, que era capitán de la Niña. Sacó el Almirante la bandera real y los capitanes con dos banderas de la Cruz Verde, que llevaba el Almirante en todos los navíos por seña, con una F y una Y: encima de cada letra su corona, una de un cabo de la cruz y otra de otro. Puestos en tierra vieron árboles muy verdes y aguas muchas y frutas de diversas maneras. El Almirante llamó a los dos capitanes y a los demás que saltaron en tierra, y a Rodrigo de Escobedo, escribano de toda el armada, y a Rodrigo Sánchez de Segovia, y dijo que le diesen por fe y testimonio cómo él por ante todos tomaba, como de hecho tomó, posesión de la dicha isla por el Rey y por la Reina sus señores, haciendo las protestaciones que se requerían, como más largo se contiene en los testimonios que allí se hicieron por escrito. Luego se ajuntó allí mucha gente de la isla. Esto que se sigue son palabras formales del Almirante, en su libro de su primera navegación y descubrimiento de estas Indias. «Yo -dice él-, porque nos tuviesen mucha amistad, porque conocí que era gente que mejor se libraría y convertiría a nuestra Santa Fe con amor que no por fuerza, les di a algunos de ellos unos bonetes colorados y unas cuentas de vidrio que se ponían al pescuezo, y otras cosas muchas de poco valor, con que hubieron mucho placer y quedaron tanto nuestros que era maravilla. Los cuales después venían a las barcas de los navíos adonde nos estábamos, nadando, y nos traían papagayos e hilo de algodón en ovillos y azagayas y otras cosas muchas, y nos las trocaban por otras cosas que nos les dábamos, como cuentecillas de vidrio y cascabeles. En fin, todo tomaban y daban de aquello que tenían de buena voluntad. Mas me pareció que era gente muy pobre de todo. Ellos andan todos desnudos como su madre los parió, y también las mujeres, aunque no vi más de una harto moza. Y todos los que yo vi eran todos mancebos, que ninguno vi de edad de más de treinta años: muy bien hechos, de muy hermosos cuerpos y muy buenas caras: los cabellos gruesos casi como sedas de cola de caballo, y cortos: los cabellos traen por encima de las cejas, salvo unos pocos detrás que traen largos, que jamás cortan. De ellos se pintan de prieto, y ellos son de la color de los canarios ni negros ni blancos, y de ellos se pintan de blanco, y de ellos de colorado, y de ellos de lo que hallan, y de ellos se pintan las caras, y de ellos todo el cuerpo, y de ellos solos los ojos, y de ellos sólo el nariz. Ellos no traen armas ni las conocen, porque les mostré espadas y las tomaban por el filo y se cortaban con ignorancia. No tienen algún hierro: sus azagayas son unas varas sin hierro, y algunas de ellas tienen al cabo un diente de pez, y otras de otras cosas. Ellos todos a una mano Son de buena estatura de grandeza y buenos gestos, bien hechos. Yo vi algunos que tenían señales de heridas en sus cuerpos, y les hice señas qué era aquello, y ellos me mostraron cómo allí venían gente de otras islas que estaban cerca y les querían tomar y se defendían. Y yo creí y creo que aquí vienen de tierra firme a tomarlos por cautivos. Ellos deben ser buenos servidores y de buen ingenio, que veo que muy presto dicen todo lo que les decía, y creo que ligeramente se harían cristianos; que me pareció que ninguna secta tenían. Yo, placiendo a Nuestro Señor, llevaré de aquí al tiempo de mi partida seis a Vuestras Altezas para que aprendan a hablar. Ninguna bestia de ninguna manera vi, salvo papagayos, en esta isla.» Todas son palabras del Almirante.
Sábado, 13 de octubre
« Luego que amaneció vinieron a la playa muchos de estos hombres, todos mancebos, como dicho tengo, y todos de buena estatura, gente muy hermosa: los cabellos no crespos, salvo corredios y gruesos, como sedas de caballo, y todos de la frente y cabeza muy ancha más que otra generación que hasta aquí haya visto, y los ojos muy hermosos y no pequeños, y ellos ninguno prieto, salvo de la color de los canarios, ni se debe esperar otra cosa, pues está Este Oeste con la isla de Hierro, en Canaria, bajo una línea. Las piernas muy derechas, todos a una mano, y no barriga, salvo muy bien hecha. Ellos vinieron a la nao con almadías, que son hechas del pie de un árbol, como un barco luengo, y todo de un pedazo, y labrado muy a maravilla, según la tierra, y grandes, en que en algunas venían cuarenta o cuarenta y cinco hombres, y otras más pequeñas, hasta haber de ellas en que venía un solo hombre. Remaban con una pala como de hornero, y anda a maravilla; y si se le trastorna, luego se echan todos a nadar y la enderezan y vacían con calabazas que traen ellos. Traían ovillos de algodón hilado y papagayos y azagayas y otras cositas que sería tedio de escribir, y todo daban por cualquier cosa que se los diese. Y yo estaba atento y trabajaba de saber si había oro, y vi que algunos de ellos traían un pedazuelo colgado en un agujero que tienen a la nariz, y por señas pude entender que yendo al Sur o volviendo la isla por el Sur, que estaba allí un rey que tenía grandes vasos de ello, y tenía muy mucho. Trabajé que fuesen allá, y después vi que no entendían en la ida. Determiné de aguardar hasta mañana en la tarde y después partir para el Sudeste, que según muchos de ellos me enseñaron decían que había tierra al Sur y al Sudoeste y al Noroeste, y que éstas del Noroeste les venían a combatir muchas veces, y así ir al Sudoeste a buscar el oro y piedras preciosas. Esta isla es bien grande y muy llana y de árboles muy verdes y muchas aguas y una laguna en medio muy grande, sin ninguna montaña, y toda ella verde, que es placer de mirarla; y esta gente harto mansa, y por la gana de haber de nuestras cosas, y temiendo que no se les ha de dar sin que den algo y no lo tienen, toman lo que pueden y se echan luego a nadar; que hasta los pedazos de las escudillas y de las tazas de vidrio rotas rescataban hasta que vi dar dieciséis ovillos de algodón por tres ceotís de Portugal, que es una blanca de Castilla, y en ellos habría más de una arroba de algodón hilado. Esto defendiera y no dejara tomar a nadie, salvo que yo lo mandara tomar todo para Vuestras Altezas si hubiera en cantidad. Aquí nace en esta isla, mas por el poco tiempo no pude dar así del todo fe. Y también aquí nace el oro que traen colgado a la nariz; más, por no perder tiempo quiero ir a ver si puedo topar a la isla de Cipango. Ahora, como fue noche, todos se fueron a tierra con sus almadías.»
Domingo, 14 de octubre
«En amaneciendo mandé aderezar el batel de la nao y las barcas de las carabelas, y fui al luengo de la isla, en el camino del Nordeste, para ver la otra parte, que era de la otra parte, del Este que había, y también para ver las poblaciones, y vi luego dos o tres, y la gente que venían todos a la playa llamándonos y dando gracias a Dios. Los unos nos traían agua; otros, otras cosas de comer; otros, cuando veían que yo no curaba de ir a tierra, se echaban a la mar nadando y venían, y entendíamos que nos preguntaban si éramos venidos del cielo. Y vino uno viejo en el batel dentro, y otros a voces grandes llamaban todos, hombres y mujeres: «Venid a ver los hombres que vinieron del cielo; traedles de comer y de beber». Vinieron muchos y muchas mujeres, cada uno con algo, dando gracias a Dios, echándose al suelo, y levantaban las manos al cielo, y después nos llamaban que fuésemos a tierra. Mas yo temía de ver una grande restinga de piedras que cerca toda aquella isla alrededor, y entre medias queda hondo el puerto para cuantas naos hay en toda la Cristiandad, y la entrada de ello muy angosta. Es verdad que dentro de esta cinta hay algunas bajas, mas la mar no se mueve más que dentro en un pozo. Y para ver todo esto me moví esta mañana, porque supiese dar de todo relación a Vuestras Altezas y también adónde pudiera hacer fortaleza, y vi un pedazo de tierra que se hace como isla, aunque no lo es, en que había seis casas, el cual se pudiera atajar en dos días por isla; aunque yo no veo necesario, porque esta gente es muy simplice en armas, como verán Vuestras Altezas de siete que yo hice tomar para les llevar y aprender nuestra habla y volverlos, salvo que Vuestras Altezas cuando mandaren puédenlos todos llevar a Castilla o tenerlos en la misma isla cautivos, porque con cincuenta hombres los tendrán todos sojuzgados y les harán hacer todo lo que quisieren. Y después junto con la dicha isleta están huertas de árboles las más hermosas que yo vi, y tan verdes y con sus hojas como las de Castilla en el mes de abril y de mayo, y mucha agua. Yo miré todo aquel puerto y después me volví a la nao y di a la vela, y vi tantas islas que yo no sabía determinarme a cuál iría primero. Y aquellos hombres que yo tenía tomado me decían por señas que eran tantas y tantas que no había número, y nombraron por su nombre más de ciento. Por ende yo miré por la más grande, y a aquélla determiné andar, y así hago, y será lejos de ésta de San Salvador cinco leguas; y las otras de ellas más, de ellas menos. Todas son muy llanas, sin montañas y muy fértiles y todas pobladas, y se hacen la guerra la una a la otra, aunque éstos son muy símplices y muy lindos cuerpos de hombres.»
Lunes, 15 de octubre
«Había temporejado esta noche con temor de no llegar a tierra a surgir antes de la mañana, y por no saber si la costa era limpia de bajas, y en amaneciendo cargar velas. Y como la isla fuese más lejos de cinco leguas, antes será siete, y la marea me detuvo, sería medio día cuando llegué a la dicha isla.Y hallé que aquella haz que es de la parte de la isla de San Salvador se corre Norte Sur y hay en ella cinco leguas, y la otra que yo seguí se corría este Oeste y hay en ella más de diez leguas. Y como de esta isla vi otra mayor al Oeste, cargué las velas por andar todo aquel día hasta la noche, porque aún no pudiera haber andado al cabo del Oeste, a la cual puse nombre la isla de Santa María de la Concepción. Y casi al poner del sol surgí acerca del dicho cabo por saber si había allí oro, porque estos que yo había hecho tomar en la isla de San Salvador me decían que ahí traían manillas de oro muy grandes a las piernas y a los brazos. Yo bien creí que todo lo que decían era burla para se huir. Con todo, mi voluntad era de no pasar por ninguna isla de que no tomase posesión, puesto que tomado de una se puede decir de todas. Y surgí y estuve hasta hoy martes, que en amaneciendo fui a tierra con las barcas armadas y salí; y ellos, que eran muchos así desnudos y de la misma condición de la otra isla de San Salvador, nos dejaron ir por la isla y nos daban lo que les pedía. Y porque el viento cargaba a la traviesa Sudeste no me quise detener y partí para la nao, y una almadía grande estaba a bordo de la carabela Niña; y uno de los hombres de la isla de San Salvador, que en ella era, se echó a la mar y se fue en ella; y la noche de antes a me dio echado al otro y fue atrás la almadía, la cual huyó que jamás fue barca que le pudiese alcanzar, puesto que le teníamos grande avante. Con todo, dio en tierra y dejaron la almadía; y algunos de los de mi compañía salieron en tierra tras ellos, y todos huyeron como gallinas, y la almadía que habían dejado la llevamos a bordo de la carabela Niña, adonde ya, de otro cabo, venía otra almadía pequeña con un hombre que venía a rescatar un ovillo de algodón; y se echaron algunos marineros a la mar, porque él no quería entrar en la carabela, y le tomaron. Y yo, que estaba en la popa de la nao, que vi todo, envié por él y le di un bonete colorado y unas cuentas de vidrio verdes, pequeñas, que le puse al brazo, y dos cascabeles que le puse a las orejas, y le mandé volver a su almadía, que también tenía en la barca, y le envié a tierra. Y di luego la vela para ir a la otra isla grande que yo veía al Oeste, y mandé largar también la otra almadía que traía la carabela Niña por popa. Y vi después en tierra, al tiempo de la llegada del otro a quien yo había dado las cosas susodichas y no le había querido tomar el ovillo de algodón, puesto que él me lo quería dar, y todos los otros se llegaron a él y tenía a gran maravilla y bien le pareció que éramos buena gente, y que el otro que se había huido nos había hecho algún daño y que por esto lo llevábamos. Y a esta razón usé esto con él, de le mandar alargar, y le di las dichas cosas porque nos tuviese en esta estima, porque otra vez cuando Vuestras Altezas aquí tornen a enviar no haga mala compañía; y todo lo que yo le di no valía cuatro maravedís. Y así partí, que serían las diez horas, con el viento Sudeste, y tocaba de Sur para pasar a esta otra isla, la cual es grandísima y adonde todos estos hombres que yo traigo de la de San Salvador hacen señas que hay muy mucho oro y que lo traen en los brazos en manillas y a las piernas y a las orejas y al nariz y al pescuezo. Y había de esta isla de Santa María a esta otra nueve leguas Este Oeste, y se corre toda esta parte de la isla Noroeste Sudeste. Y se parece que bien habría en esta costa más de veintiocho leguas en esta haz. Y es muy llana sin montaña ninguna, así como aquellas de San Salvador y de Santa María, y todas las playas sin roquedos, salvo que en todas hay algunas peñas cerca de tierra debajo del agua; por donde es menester abrir el ojo cuando se quiere surgir y no surgir mucho acerca de tierra, aunque las aguas son siempre muy claras y se ve el fondo. Y desviado de tierra dos tiros de lombarda, hay en todas estas islas tanto fondo que no se puede llegar a él. Son estas islas muy verdes y fértiles y de aires muy dulces, y puede haber muchas cosas que yo no sé, porque no me quiero detener por calar y andar muchas islas para hallar oro. Y pues éstas dan así estas señas, que lo traen a los brazos y a las piernas, y es oro porque les mostré algunos pedazos del que yo tengo, no puedo errar con la ayuda de Nuestro Señor que yo no le halle adonde nace. Y estando a medio golfo de estas dos islas es de saber de aquella de Santa Maria y de esta grande, a la cual pongo nombre la Fernandina hallé un hombre solo en una almadía que se pasaba de la isla de Santa María a la Fernandina, y traía un poco de su pan, que sería tanto como el puño, y una calabaza de agua y un pedazo de tierra bermeja hecha en polvo y después amasada, y unas hojas secas que debe ser cosa muy apreciada entre ellos porque ya me trajeron en San Salvador de ellas en presente, y traía un cestillo a su guisa en que tenía un ramalejo de cuentecillas de vidrio y dos blancas, por las cuales conocí que él venía de la isla de San Salvador y había pasado a aquella de Santa María y se pasaba a la Fernandina, el cual se llegó a la nao. Yo le hice entrar, que así lo demandaba él, y le hice poner su almadía en la nao y guardar todo lo que él traía; y le mandé dar de comer pan y miel y de beber. Y así le pasaré a la Fernandina y le daré todo lo suyo, porque dé buenas nuevas de nos para, a Nuestro Señor aplaciendo, cuando Vuestras Altezas envien acá, que aquellos que vinieren reciban honra y nos den de todo lo que hubiere.»
Martes, 16 de octubre
«Partí de las islas de Santa Maria de la Concepción, que sería ya cerca del medio día, para la isla Fernandina, la cual muestra ser grandísima al Oeste, y navegué todo aquel día con calmeria. No pude llegar a tiempo de poder ver el fondo para surgir en limpio, porque es en esto mucho de haber gran diligencia por no perder las anclas; y así temporicé toda esta noche hasta el día que vine a una población, adonde yo surgí y donde había venido aquel hombre que yo hallé ayer en aquella almadía a medio golfo, el cual había dado tantas buenas nuevas de nos que toda esta noche no faltaron almadías a bordo de la nao, que nos traían agua y de lo que tenían. Yo a cada uno le mandaba dar algo, es a saber, algunas cuentecillas, diez o doce de ellas de vidrio en un hilo, y algunas sonajas de latón de éstas que valen en Castilla un maravedí cada una, y algunas agujetas, de que todo tenían en grandísima excelencia, y también los mandaba dar, para que comiesen cuando venían en la nao, y miel de azúcar. Y después, a horas de tercia, envié al batel de la nao en tierra por agua, y ellos de muy buena gana le enseñaban a mi gente adónde estaba el agua, y ellos mismos traían los barriles llenos al batel y se holgaban mucho de nos hacer placer. Esta isla es grandísima y tengo determinado de la rodear, porque, según puedo entender, en ella o cerca de ella hay mina de oro. Esta isla está desviada de la de Santa María ocho leguas casi Este Oeste; y este cabo adonde yo vine y toda esta costa se corre Noroeste y Sursudeste, y vi bien veinte leguas de ella, mas ahí no acababa. Ahora escribiendo esto, di la vela con el viento Sur para pujar a rodear toda la isla, y trabajar hasta que halle Samaot, que es la isla o ciudad adonde es el oro, que así lo dicen todos estos que aquí vienen en la nao, y nos lo decían los de la isla de San Salvador y de Santa María. Esta gente es semejante a aquellas de las dichas islas, y una habla y unas costumbres, salvo que éstos ya me parecen algún tanto más doméstica gente y de trato y más sutiles, porque veo que han traído algodón aquí a la nao y otras cositas, que saben mejor refetar el pagamento que no hacían los otros. Y aun en esta isla vi paños de algodón hechos como mantillos, y la gente más dispuesta, y las mujeres traen por delante su cuerpo una cosita de algodón que escasamente les cobija su natura. Ella es isla muy verde y llana y fertilísima, y no pongo duda de que todo el año siembran panizo y cogen, y así todas otras cosas. Y vi muchos árboles muy disformes de los nuestros, y de ellos muchos que tenían los ramos de muchas maneras y todo en un pie, y un ramito es de una manera y otro de otra, y tan disforme que es la mayor maravilla del mundo cuánta es la diversidad de una manera a la otra; verbigracia, un ramo tenía las hojas a manera de cañas y otro de la manera de lentisco, y así en un solo árbol de cinco o seis de estas maneras, y todos tan diversos; ni éstos son injertados, porque se pueda decir que el injerto lo hace, antes son por los montes, ni cura de ellos esta gente. No les conozco secta ninguna, y creo que muy presto se tornarían cristianos, porque ellos son de muy buen entender. Aquí son los peces tan disformes de los nuestros que es maravilla. Hay algunos hechos como gallos, de las más finas colores del mundo, azules, amanlíos, colorados y de todas colores, y otros pintados de mil maneras; y las colores son tan finas que no hay hombre que no se maraville y no tome gran descanso a verlos. También hay ballenas. Bestias en tierra no vi ninguna de ninguna manera, salvo papagayos y lagartos. Un mozo me dijo que vio una grande culebra. Ovejas ni cabras ni otra ninguna bestia vi; aunque yo he estado aquí muy poco, que es medio día: mas si las hubiese no pudiera errar de ver alguna. El cerco de esta isla escribiré después que yo la hubiese rodeado.»
Miércoles, 17 de octubre
«A mediodía partí de la población adonde yo estaba surgido y adonde tomé agua para ir a rodear esta isla Fernandina, y el viento era Sudoeste y Sur, y como mi voluntad fuese de seguir esta costa de esta isla adonde yo estaba al Sudeste, porque así se corre toda Nornoroeste y Sursudeste y quería llevar el dicho camino de Sur y Sudeste, porque aquella parte todos estos indios que traigo y otro de quien hube señas en esta parte del Sur a la isla a que ellos llaman Samoet, adonde es el oro, y Martín Alonso Pinzón, capitán de la carabela Pinta, en la cual yo mandé a tres de estos indios, vino a mi y me dijo que uno de ellos muy certificadamente le había dado a entender que por la parte del Nornoroeste muy más presto arrodearía la isla. Yo vi que el viento no me ayudaba por el camino que yo quería llevar, y era bueno por el otro. Di la vela al Nornoroeste, y cuando fui cerca del cabo de la isla, a dos leguas, hallé un muy maravilloso puerto con una boca, aunque dos bocas se le puede decir, porque tiene un isleo en medio y son ambas muy angostas y dentro muy ancho para cien navíos, si fuera hondo y limpio y hondo a la entrada. Parecióme razón de lo ver bien y sondear, y así surgí fuera de él y fui en él con todas las barcas de los navíos y vimos que no había fondo. Y porque pensé cuando yo le vi que era boca de algún río, había mandado llevar barriles para tomar agua, y en tierra hallé unos ocho o diez hombres que luego vinieron a nos y nos mostraron ahí cerca la población, adonde yo envié la gente por agua, una parte con armas, otros con barriles, y así la tomaron; y porque era lejuelos me detuve por espacio de dos horas. En este tiempo anduve así por aquellos árboles, que era la cosa más hermosa de ver que otra se haya visto, viendo tanta verdura en tanto grado como en el mes de mayo en el Andalucía, y los árboles todos están tan disformes de los nuestros como el día de la noche; y así las frutas y así las hierbas y las piedras y todas las cosas. Verdad es que algunos árboles eran de la naturaleza de otros que hay en Castilla: por ende había muy gran diferencia, y los otros árboles de otras maneras eran tantos que no hay persona que lo pueda decir ni asemejar a otros en Castilla. La gente toda era una con los otros ya dichos, de las mismas condiciones, y así desnudos y de la misma estatura, y daban de lo que tenían por cualquier cosa que les diesen; y aquí vi que unos mozos de los navíos les trocaron azagayas por unos pedazuelos de escudillas rotas y de vidrio. Y los otros que fueron por el agua me dijeron cómo habían estado en sus casas y que eran de adentro muy barridas y limpias, y sus camas y paramentos de cosas que son como redes de algodón; ellas, las casas, son todas a manera de alfaneques y muy altas y buenas chimeneas; mas no vi entre muchas poblaciones que yo vi que ninguna pasase de doce hasta quince casas. Aquí hallaron que las mujeres casadas traían bragas de algodón, las mozas no, sino salvo algunas que eran ya de edad de dieciocho años. Y ahí había perros mastines y branchetes, y ahí hallaron uno que había al nariz un pedazo de oro que sería como la mitad de un castellano, en el cual vieron letras. Reñí yo con ellos porque no se lo rescataron y dieron cuanto pedía, por ver qué era y cúya esta moneda era; y ellos me respondieron que nunca se lo osó rescatar. Después de tomada la agua volví a la nao, y di la vela y salí al Noroeste, tanto que yo descubrí toda aquella parte de la isla hasta la costa que se corre Este Oeste, y después todos estos indios tornaron a decir que esta isla era más pequeña que no la isla Samoet y que sería bien volver atrás por ser en ella más presto. El viento allí luego más calmo y comenzó a ventear Oesnoroeste, el cual era contrario para donde habíamos venido, y así tomé la vuelta y navegué toda esta noche pasada al Estesudeste, y cuándo al Este todo y cuándo al Sudeste; y esto para apartarme de la tierra, porque hacia muy gran cerrazón y el tiempo muy cargado; él era poco y no me dejó llegar a tierra a surgir. Así que esta noche llovió muy fuerte después de media noche hasta casi el día, y aún está nublado para llover, y nos, al cabo de la isla de la parte del Sudeste, adonde espero surgir hasta que aclarezca para ver las otras islas adonde tengo de ir. Y así todos estos días después que en estas Indias estoy ha llovido poco o mucho. Crean Vuestras Altezas que es esta tierra la mejor y más fértil y temperada y llana y buena que haya en el mundo.»
Jueves, 18 de octubre
«Después que aclareció seguí el viento, y fui en derredor de la isla cuanto pude, y surgí al tiempo que ya no era de navegar; mas no fui en tierra, y en amaneciendo di la vela.»
Viernes, 19 de octubre
«En amaneciendo levanté las anclas y envié la carabela Pinta al Este y Sudeste y la carabela Niña al Sursudeste, y yo con la nao fui al Sudeste, y dado orden que llevasen aquella vuelta hasta medio día, y después que ambas se mudasen las derrotas, y se recogieron para mí. Y luego, antes que andásemos tres horas, vimos una isla al Este sobre la cual descargamos. y llegamos a ella todos tres navíos antes de medio día a la punta del Norte, adonde hace un isleo y una restinga de piedra fuera de él al Norte y otro entre él y la isla grande; la cual nombraron estos hombres de San Salvador que yo traigo la isla Samoet, a la cual puse nombre de la Isabela. El viento era Norte, y quedaba el dicho isleo en derrota de la isla Fernandina, de adonde yo había partido Este Oeste; y se corría después la costa desde el isleo al Oeste y había en ella doce leguas hasta un cabo, al que yo llamé el Cabo Hermoso, que es de la parte del Oeste. Y así es hermoso, redondo y muy hondo, sin bajas fuera de él, y al comienzo de piedra y bajo y más adentro es playa de arena como casi la dicha costa es. Y ahí surgí esta noche viernes hasta la mañana. Esta costa toda y la parte de la isla que yo vi es toda casi playa, y la isla más hermosa cosa que yo vi; que si las otras son muy hermosas, ésta es más. Es de muchos árboles y muy verdes y muy grandes, y esta tierra es más alta que las otras islas halladas, y en ella algún altillo, no que se le pueda llamar montaña, mas cosa que hermosea lo otro, y parece de muchas aguas allá al medio de la isla. De esta parte al Nordeste hace una gran angla, y hay muchos arboledos y muy espesos y muy grandes. Yo quise ir a surgir en ella para salir a tierra y ver tanta hermosura; mas era el fondo bajo y no podía surgir salvo largo de tierra, y el viento era muy bueno para venir a este cabo adonde yo surgí ahora, al cual puse nombre Cabo Hermoso, porque así lo es. Y así no surgí en aquella angla, y aun porque vi este cabo de allá tan verde y tan hermoso, así como todas las otras cosas y tierras de estas islas que yo no sé adónde me vaya primero ni me sé cansar los ojos de ver tan hermosas verduras y tan diversas de las nuestras. Y aun creo que hay en ella muchas hierbas y muchos árboles que valen mucho en España para tinturas y medicinas de especiería, mas yo no los conozco, de que llevo grande pena. Y llegando yo aquí a este cabo vino el olor tan bueno y suave de flores o árboles de la tierra, que era la cosa más dulce del mundo. De mañana, antes que yo de aquí vaya iré en tierra a ver qué es. Aquí en el cabo no es la población salvo allá más adentro, donde dicen otros hombres que yo traigo que está el rey que trae mucho oro; y yo de mañana quiero ir tanto avante que halle la población y vea o haya lengua con este rey que, según éstos dan las señas, él señorea todas estas islas comarcanas y va vestido y trae sobre sí mucho oro; aunque yo no doy mucha fe a sus decires, así por no los entender yo bien como en conocer que ellos son tan pobres de oro que cualquiera poco que este rey traiga les parece a ellos mucho. Este al que yo digo Cabo Hermoso creo que es la isla apartada de Samoeto, y aun hay ya otras entremedias pequeñas. Yo no curo así de ver tanto por menudo 69, porque no lo podría hacer en cincuenta años, porque quiero ver y descubrir lo más que yo pudiere para volver a Vuestras Altezas, a Nuestro Señor aplaciendo, en abril. Verdad es que, hallando adonde haya oro o especiería en cantidad, me detendré hasta que yo haya de ello cuanto pudiere; y por esto no hago sino andar para ver de topar en ello.»
Sábado, 20 de octubre
«Hoy, el sol salido, levanté las anclas de donde yo estaba con la nao surgido en esta isla de Samoeto al cabo del Sudoeste, al que yo puse nombre el Cabo de la Laguna, y a la isla la Isabela, para navegar al Nordeste y al Este de la parte Sudeste y Sur, adonde entendí de estos hombres que yo traigo que era la población y el rey de ella. Y hallé todo tan bajo el fondo que no pude entrar ni navegar a ello, y vi que siguiendo el camino del Sudoeste era muy gran rodeo, y por esto determiné de me volver por el camino que yo había traído del Nornordeste de la parte del Oeste, y rodear esta isla para... el viento me fue tan escaso que yo nunca pude haber la tierra al longo de la costa, salvo en la noche. Y, porque es peligro surgir en estas islas, salvo en el día que se vea con el ojo adónde se echa el anda, porque es todo manchas, una de limpio y otra de non, yo me puse a temporejar a la vela toda esta noche del domingo. Las carabelas surgieron porque se hallaron en tierra temprano y pensaron que a sus señas, que eran costumbradas de hacer, iría a surgir; mas no quise.»
Domingo, 21 de octubre
«A las diez horas llegué aquí a este cabo del isleo y surgí, y asimismo las carabelas. Y después de haber comido fui en tierra, adonde aquí no había otra población que una casa, en la cual no hallé a nadie, que creo con temor se habían huido, porque en ella estaban todos sus aderezos de casa. Yo no les dejé tocar nada, salvo que me salí con estos capitanes y gente a ver la isla; que si las otras ya vistas son muy hermosas y verdes y fértiles, ésta es mucho más y de grandes arboledos y muy verdes. Aquí es unas grandes lagunas, y sobre ellas y a la rueda es el arboledo en maravilla, y aquí y en toda la isla son todos verdes y las hierbas como en abril en el Andalucía; y el cantar de los pajaritos que parece que el hombre nunca se querría partir de aquí, y las manadas de los papagayos que oscurecen el sol; y aves y pajaritos de tantas maneras y tan diversas de las nuestras que es maravilla; y después hay árboles de mil maneras y todos de su manera fruto, y todos huelen que es maravilla, que yo estoy el más apenado del mundo de no conocerlos, porque soy bien cierto que todos son cosa de valía, y de ellos traigo la muestra y asimismo de las hierbas. Andando así en cerco de una de estas lagunas vi una sierpe la cual matamos y traigo el cuero a Vuestras Altezas. Ella como nos vio se echó en la laguna y nos la seguimos dentro, porque no era muy honda, hasta que con lanzas la matamos. Es de siete palmos de largo; creo que de estas semejantes hay aquí en esta laguna muchas. Aquí conocí del liñáloe, y mañana he determinado de hacer traer a la nao diez quintales, porque me dicen que vale mucho. También andando en busca de muy buena agua fuimos a una población aquí cerca, adonde estoy surto media legua; y la gente de ella, como nos sintieron, dieron todos a huir y dejaron las casas y escondieron su ropa y lo que tenían por el monte. Yo no dejé tomar nada ni la valía de un alfiler. Después se llegaron a nos unos hombres de ellos, y uno se llegó a quien yo di unos cascabeles y unas cuentecillas de vidrio y quedó muy contento y muy alegre, y por que la amistad creciese más y los requiriese algo, le hice pedir agua, y ellos, después que fui en la nao, vinieron luego a la playa con sus calabazas llenas y holgaron mucho de dárnosla. Y yo les mandé dar otro ramalejo de cuentecillas de vidrio y dijeron que de mañana vendrían acá. Yo quería henchir aquí toda la vasija de los navíos de agua; por ende, si el tiempo me da lugar, luego me partiré a rodear esta isla hasta que yo haya lengua con este rey y ver si puedo haber de él oro que oigo que trae, y después partir para otra isla grande mucho, que creo que debe ser Cipango, según las señas que me dan estos indios que yo traigo, a la cual ellos llaman Colba, en la cual dicen que hay naos y mareantes muchos y muy grandes, y de esta isla otra que llaman Bofío que también dicen que es muy grande. Y a las otras que son entremedio veré así de pasada, y según yo hallare recaudo de oro o especiería determinaré lo que he de hacer. Más todavía, tengo determinado de ir a la tierra firme y a la ciudad de Quisay y dar las cartas de Vuestras Altezas al Gran Can y pedir respuesta y venir con ella.»
Lunes, 22 de octubre
«Toda esta noche y hoy estuve aquí aguardando si el rey de aquí u otras personas traerían oro u otra cosa de sustancia, y vinieron muchos de esta gente, semejantes a los otros de las otras islas, así desnudos y así pintados, de ellos de blanco, de ellos de colorado, de ellos de prieto y así de muchas maneras.Traían azagayas y algunos ovillos de algodón a rescatar, el cual trocaban aquí con algunos marineros por pedazos de vidrio, de tazas quebradas y por pedazos de escudillas de barro. Algunos de ellos traían algunos pedazos de oro colgados al nariz, el cual de buena gana daban por un cascabel de esos de pie de gavilano 76 y por cuentecillas de vidrio: mas es tan poco, que no es nada: que es verdad que cualquiera poca cosa que se les dé. Ellos también tenían a gran maravilla nuestra venida, y creían que éramos venidos del cielo. Tomamos agua para los navíos en una laguna que aquí está cerca del cabo del Isleo, que así nombré; y en la dicha laguna Martín Alonso Pinzón, capitán de la Pinta, mató otra sierpe tal como la otra de ayer de siete palmos, e hice tomar aquí del liñábe cuanto se halló.»
Martes, 23 de octubre
«Quisiera hoy partir para la isla de Cuba, que creo que debe ser Cipango, según las señas que dan esta gente de la grandeza de ella y riqueza, y no me detendré más aquí ni...esta isla alrededor para ir a la población, como tenía determinado, para haber lengua con este rey o señor, que es por no me detener mucho, pues veo que aquí no hay mina de oro; y al rodear de estas islas ha menester muchas maneras de viento, y no vienta así como los hombres querrían. Y pues es de andar donde haya trato grande, digo que no es razón de se detener, salvo ir a camino y calar mucha tierra hasta topar en tierra muy provechosa, aunque mi entender es que ésta sea muy provechosa de especiería, mas que yo no la conozco que llevo la mayor pena del mundo, que veo mil maneras de árboles que tienen cada uno su manera de fruta y verde ahora como en España en el mes de mayo y junio y mil maneras de hierbas, eso mismo con flores, y de todo no se conoció salvo este liñáloe de que hoy mandé también traer a la nao mucho para llevar a Vuestras Altezas. Y no he dado ni doy la vela para Cuba porque no hay viento, salvo calma muerta, y llueve mucho. Y llovió ayer mucho sin hacer ningún frío; antes el día hace calor y las noches temperadas como en mayo en España en el Andalucía.»
Miércoles, 24 de octubre
«Esta noche a media noche levanté las anclas de la isla Isabela del cabo del Isleo, que es de la parte del Norte, adonde yo estaba posado para ir a la isla de Cuba, adonde oí de esta gente que era muy grande y de gran trato y había en ella oro y especierías y naos grandes y mercaderes, y me mostró que al Oessudoeste iría a ella; y yo así lo tengo, porque creo que si es así, como por señas que me hicieron todos los indios de estas islas y aquellos que llevo yo en los navíos, porque por lengua no los entiendo, es la isla de Cipango, de que se cuentan cosas maravillosas, y en las esferas que yo vi y en las pinturas de mapamundos es ella en esta comarca. Y así navegué hasta el día al Oessudoeste, y amaneciendo calmó el viento y llovió, y así casi toda la noche. Y estuve así con poco viento hasta que pasaba de medio día y entonces tomó a ventear muy amoroso, y llevaba todas mis velas de la nao: maestra y dos bonetas y trinquete y cebadera y mesana y vela de gabia, y el batel por popa. Así anduve el camino hasta que anocheció; y entonces me quedaba el Cabo Verde de la isla Fernandina, el cual es de la parte del Sur a la parte de Oeste. Me quedaba al Noroeste, y hacía de mí a él siete leguas. Y porque ventaba ya recio y no sabía yo cuánto camino hubiese hasta la dicha isla de Cuba, y por no la ir a demandar de noche, porque todas estas islas son muy hondas a no hallar fondo todo en derredor salvo a tiro de dos lombardas, y esto es todo manchado un pedazo de roquedo y otro de arena, y por esto no se puede seguramente surgir salvo a vista de ojo, y por tanto acordé de amainar las velas todas, salvo el trinquete, y andar con él; y de a un rato crecía mucho el viento y hacía mucho camino de que dudaba, y era muy gran cerrazón y llovía. Mandé amainar el trinquete y no anduvimos esta noche dos leguas, etc.»
Jueves, 25 de octubre
Navegó después del sol salido al Oessudoeste hasta las nueve horas. Andarían cinco leguas. Después mudó el camino al Oeste. Andaban ocho millas por hora hasta la una después de mediodía, y de allí hasta las tres y andarían cuarenta y cuatro millas. Entonces vieron tierra, y eran siete u ocho islas, en luengo todas de Norte a Sur; distaban de ellas cinco leguas, etcétera.
Viernes, 26 de octubre
Estuvo de las dichas islas de la parte del Sur. Era todo bajo cinco o seis leguas; surgió por allí. Dijeron los indios que llevaba que había de ellas a Cuba andadura de día y medio con sus almadías, que son navetas de un madero adonde no llevan vela. Estas son las canoas. Partió de allí para Cuba, porque por las señas que los indios le daban de la grandeza y del oro y perlas de ella, pensaba que era ella, conviene a saber: Cipango.
Sábado, 27 de octubre
Levantó las anclas salido el sol, de aquellas islas, que llamó las islas de Arena por el poco fondo que tenían de la parte del Sur hasta seis leguas. Anduvo ocho millas por hora hasta la una del día al Sursudoeste, y habrían andado cuarenta millas, y hasta la noche andarían veintiocho millas al mismo camino; y antes de noche vieron tierra. Estuvieron la noche al reparo con mucha lluvia que llovió. Anduvieron el sábado hasta el poner del sol diecisiete leguas al Sursudoeste.
Domingo, 28 de octubre
Fue de allí en demanda de la isla de Cuba al Sursudoeste, a la tierra de ella más cercana, y entró en un río muy hermoso y muy sin peligro de bajas ni otros inconvenientes; y toda la costa que anduvo por allí era muy hondo y muy limpio hasta tierra: tenía la boca del río doce brazas, y es bien ancha para barloventear. Surgió dentro, dice que a tiro de lombarda. Dice el Almirante que nunca tan hermosa cosa vio, lleno de árboles, todo cercado el río, hermosos y verdes y diversos de los nuestros, con flores y con su fruto, cada uno de su manera. Aves muchas y pajaritos que cantaban muy dulcemente; había gran cantidad de palmas de otra manera que las de Guinea y de las nuestras, de una estatura mediana y los pies sin aquella camisa y las hojas muy grandes, con las cuales cobijan las casas; la tierra muy llana. Saltó el Almirante en la barca y fue a tierra, y llegó a dos casas que creyó ser de pescadores y que con temor se huyeron, en una de las cuales halló un perro que nunca ladró; y en ambas casas halló redes de hilo de palma y cordeles y anzuelo de cuerno y fisgas de hueso y otros aparejos de pescar y muchos fuegos dentro, y creyó que en cada una casa se juntan muchas personas. Mandó que no se tocase en cosa de todo ello, y así se hizo. La hierba era grande como en el Andalucía por abril y mayo. Halló verdolagas muchas y bledos. Tornóse a la barca y anduvo por el río arriba un buen rato, y dice que era gran placer ver aquellas verduras y arboledas, y de las aves que no podía dejarlas para se volver. Dice que es aquella isla la más hermosa que ojos hayan visto, llena de muy buenos puertos y ríos hondos, y la mar que parecía que nunca se debía de alzar porque la hierba de la playa llegaba hasta casi el agua, la cual no suele llegar donde la mar es brava. Hasta entonces no había experimentado en todas aquellas islas que la mar fuese brava. La isla dice que es llena de montañas muy hermosas, aunque no son muy grandes en longura, salvo altas, y toda la otra tierra es alta de la manera de Sicilia; llena es de muchas aguas, según pudo entender de los indios que consigo lleva, que tomó en la isla de Guanahaní, los cuales le dicen por señas que hay diez ríos grandes y que con sus canoas no la pueden cercar en veinte días. Cuando iba a tierra con los navíos salieron dos almadías o canoas, y como vieron que los marineros entraban en la barca y remaban para ir a ver el fondo del río para saber dónde habían de surgir, huyeron las canoas. Decían los indios que en aquella isla había minas de oro y perlas, y vio el Almirante lugar apto para ellas y almejas, que es señal de ellas, y entendía el Almirante que allí venían naos del Gran Can, y grandes, y que de allí a tierra firme había jornada de diez días Llamó el Almirante aquel río y puerto de San Salvador.
Lunes, 29 de octubre
Alzó las anclas de aquel puerto y navegó al Poniente para ir dice que a la ciudad donde le parecía que le decían los indios que estaba aquel rey. Una punta de la isla le salía a noroeste seis leguas. Andada otra legua vio un río no de tan grande entrada, al cual puso nombre de río de la Luna; anduvo hasta hora de vísperas. Vio otro río más grande que los otros, y así se lo dijeron por señas los indios, y cerca de él vio buenas poblaciones de casas: llamó al río el río de Mares. Envió dos barcas a una población por haber lengua, y a una de ellas un indio de los que traía, porque ya los entendían algo y mostraban estar contentos con los cristianos, de los cuales todos los hombres y mujeres y criaturas huyeron, desamparando las casas con todo lo que tenían; y mandó el Almirante que no se tocase en cosa. Las casas dice que eran ya más hermosas que las que había visto, y creía que cuanto más se allegase a la tierra firme serían mejores. Eran hechas a manera de alfanaques, muy grandes, y parecían tiendas en real, sin concierto de calles, sino una acá y otra acullá y dentro muy barridas y limpias y sus aderezos muy compuestos. Todas son de ramas de palma muy hermosas. Hallaron muchas estatuas en figura de mujeres y muchas cabezas en manera de caratona muy bien labradas. No sé si esto tienen por hermosura o adoran en ellas. Había perros que jamás ladraron; había avecitas salvajes mansas por sus casas; había maravillosos aderezos de redes y anzuelos y artificios de pescar. No le tocaron en cosa de ello. Creyó que todos los de la costa debían de ser pescadores que llevan el pescado la tierra dentro, porque aquella isla es muy grande y tan hermosa que no se hartaba de decir bien de ella. Dice que halló árboles y frutas de muy maravilloso sabor; y dice que debe haber vacas en ella y otros ganados, porque vio cabezas en hueso que le parecieron de vaca. Aves y pajaritos y el cantar de los grillos en toda la noche con que se holgaban todos: los aires sabrosos y dulces de toda la noche, ni frío ni caliente. Mas por el camino de las otras islas a aquélla dice que hacía gran calor y allí no, salvo templado como en mayo; atribuye el calor de las otras islas por ser muy llanas y por el viento que traían hasta allí ser Levante y por eso cálido. El agua de aquellos ríos era salada a la boca: no supieron de dónde bebían los indios, aunque tenían en sus casas agua dulce. En este río podían los navíos voltejar para entrar y para salir, y tiene muy buenas señas o marcas: tiene siete u ocho brazas de fondo a la boca y dentro cinco. Toda aquella mar dice que le parece que debe ser siempre mansa como el río de Sevilla y el agua aparejada para criar perlas. Halló caracoles grandes, sin sabor, no como los de España. Señala la disposición del río y del puerto que arriba dijo y nombró San Salvador, que tiene sus montañas hermosas y altas como la Peña de los Enamorados, y una de ellas tiene encima otro montecillo a manera de una hermosa mezquita. Este otro río y puerto en que ahora estaba tiene de la parte del Sudeste dos montañas así redondas y de la parte del Oesnoroeste un hermoso cabo llano que sale fuera.
Martes, 30 de octubre
Salió del río de Mares al Noroeste, y vio un cabo lleno de palmas y púsole Cabo de Palmas, después de haber andado quince leguas. Los indios que iban en la carabela Pinta dijeron que detrás de aquel cabo había un río y del río a Cuba había cuatro jornadas; y dijo el capitán de la Pinta que entendía que esta Cuba era ciudad y que aquella tierra era tierra firme muy grande que va mucho al Norte, y que el rey de aquella tierra tenía guerra con el Gran Can, al cual ellos llamaban Cami, y a su tierra o ciudad Faba, y otros muchos nombres. Determinó el Almirante de llegar a aquel río y enviar un presente al rey de la tierra y enviarle la carta de los reyes, y para ella tenía una marinero que había andado en Guinea en lo mismo, y ciertos indios de Guanahaní que querían ir con él, con que después los tornasen a su tierra. Al parecer del Almirante, distaba de la línea equinoccial cuarenta y dos grados hacia la banda del Norte no está corrupta la letra de donde trasladé esto, y dice que había de trabajar de ir al Gran Can, que pensaba que estaba allí, o en la ciudad de Catay, que es del Gran Can, que dice que es muy grande, según le fue dicho antes que partiese de España. Toda aquesta tierra dice ser baja y hermosa y honda la mar.
Miércoles, 31 de octubre
Toda la noche martes anduvo barloventeando, y vio un río donde no pudo entrar por ser baja la entrada; y pensaron los indios que pudieran entrar los navíos como entraban sus canoas. Y, navegando adelante, halló un cabo que salía muy fuera y cercado de bajos, y vio una concha o bahía donde podían estar navíos pequeños, y no lo pudo encabalgar porque el viento se había tirado del todo al Norte y toda la costa se corría al Nornoroeste y Sudeste, y otro cabo que vio adelante le salía más afuera. Por esto y porque el cielo mostraba de ventar recio se hubo de tornar al río de Mares.
Jueves, 1 de noviembre
En saliendo el sol envió el Almirante las barcas a tierra a las casas que allí estaban, y hallaron que era toda la gente huida, y desde a buen rato pareció un hombre y mandó el Almirante que lo dejasen asegurar, y volvieron las barcas. Y después de comer tomó a enviar a tierra uno de los indios que llevaba, el cual desde lejos le dio voces diciendo que no hubiesen miedo porque era buena gente y no hacían mal a nadie, ni eran del Gran Can, antes daban de lo suyo en muchas islas que habían estado; y echóse a nadar el indio y fue a tierra, y dos de los de allí lo tomaron de brazos y lleváronlo a una casa donde se informaron de él. Y como fueron ciertos que no se les había de hacer mal, se aseguraron y vinieron luego a los navíos más de dieciséis almadías o canoas con algodón hilado y otras cosillas suyas, de las cuales mandó el Almirante que no se tomase nada, porque supiesen que no buscaba el Almirante salvo oro, al que ellos llamaban nucay. Y así en todo el día anduvieron y vinieron de tierra a los navíos, y fueron de los cristianos a tierra muy seguramente. El Almirante no vio a alguno de ellos oro, pero dice el Almirante que vio a uno de ellos un pedazo de plata labrado colgado a la nariz, que tuvo por señal que en la tierra había plata. Dijeron por señas que antes de tres días vendrían muchos mercaderes de la tierra dentro a comprar de las cosas que allí llevan los cristianos y darían nuevas del rey de aquella tierra, el cual, según se pudo entender por las señas que daban, que estaba de allí cuatro jornadas, porque ellos habían enviado muchos por toda la tierra a le hacer saber del Almirante. «Esta gente -dice el Almirante- es de la misma calidad y costumbre de los otros hallados, sin ninguna secta que yo conozca, que hasta hoy aquestos que traigo no he visto hacer ninguno oración, antes dicen la Salve y el Ave María, con las manos al cielo como le muestran, y hacen la señal de la cruz. Toda la lengua también es una y todos amigos, y creo que sean todas estas islas y que tengan guerra con el Gran Can, a que ellos llaman Cavila y a la provincia Bafan. Y así andan también desnudos como los otros.» Esto dice el Almirante. El río dice que es muy hondo, y en la boca pueden llegar los navíos con el bordo hasta tierra; no llega el agua dulce a la boca con una legua, y es muy dulce. «Y es cierto -dice el Almirante- que ésta es la tierra firme y que estoy -dice él- ante Zaitón y Quinsay cien leguas poco más o poco menos lejos de lo uno y de lo otro, y bien se muestra por la mar que viene de otra suerte que hasta aquí no ha venido, y ayer que iba al Noroeste hallé que hacía frío.»
Viernes, 2 de noviembre
Acordó el Almirante enviar dos hombres españoles: el uno se llamaba Rodrigo de Jerez, que vivía en Ayamonte, y el otro era un Luis de Torres, que había vivido con el Adelantado de Murcia y había sido judío, y sabía dice que hebraico y caldeo y aun algo arábigo; y con éstos envió dos indios, uno de los que consigo traía de Guanahaní y el otro de aquellas casas que en el río estaban poblados. Dióles sartas de cuentas para comprar de comer si los faltase y seis días de término para que volviesen. Dióles muestras de especiería para ver si alguna de ellas topasen. Dióles instrucción de cómo habían de preguntar por el rey de aquella tierra y lo que le habían de hablar de parte de los Reyes de Castilla, cómo enviaban al Almirante para que les diese de su parte sus cartas y un presente y para saber de su estado y cobrar amistad con él y favorecerle en lo que hubiese de ellos menester, etc., y que supiesen de ciertas provincias y puertos y ríos de que el Almirante tenía noticia y cuánto distaban de allí, etc. Aquí tomó el Almirante el altura con un cuadrante esta noche, y halló que estaba 42 grados de la línea equinoccial, y dice que por su cuenta halló que había andado desde la isla de Hierro mil y ciento y cuarenta y dos leguas, y todavía afirma que aquella es tierra firme.
Sábado, 3 de noviembre
En la mañana entró en la barca el Almirante, y porque hace el río en la boca un gran lago, el cual hace un singularísimo puerto muy hondo y limpio de piedras, muy buena playa para poner navíos a monte y mucha leña, entró por el río arriba hasta llegar al agua dulce, que sería cerca de dos leguas, y subió en un montecillo por descubrir algo de la tierra, y no pudo ver nada por las grandes arboledas, las cuales eran muy frescas, odoríferas, por lo cual dicen no tener duda que no haya hierbas aromáticas. Dice que todo era tan hermoso lo que veía, que no podía cansar los ojos de ver tanta lindeza y los cantos de las aves y pajaritos. Vinieron en aquel día muchas almadías o canoas a los navíos a rescatar cosas de algodón hilado y redes en que dormían, que son hamacas.
Domingo, 4 de noviembre
Luego, en amaneciendo, entró el Almirante en la barca, y salió a tierra a cazar de las aves que el día antes había visto. Después de vuelto, vino a él Martín Alonso Pinzón con dos pedazos de canela, y dijo que un portugués que tenía en su navío había visto a un indio que traía dos manojos de ella muy grandes, pero que no se la osó rescatar por la pena que el Almirante tenía puesta que nadie rescatase. Decía más: que aquel indio traía unas cosas bermejas como nueces. El contramaestre de la Pinta dijo que había hallado árboles de canela. Fue el Almirante luego allá y halló que no eran. Mostró el Almirante a unos indios de allí canela y pimienta -parece que de la que llevaba de Castilla para muestra- y conociéronla, dice que, y dijeron por señas que cerca de allí había mucho de aquello al camino del Sudeste. Mostróles oro y perlas, y respondieron ciertos viejos que en un lugar que llamaron Bohío había infinito y que lo traían al cuello y a las orejas y a los brazos y a las piernas, y también perlas. Entendió más: que decían que había naos grandes y mercaderías, y todo esto era al Sudeste. Entendió también que lejos de allí había hombres de un ojo y otros con hocicos de perros que comían los hombres y que en tomando uno lo degollaban y le bebían su sangre y le cortaban su natura. Determinó de volver a la nao el Almirante a esperar los dos hombres que había enviado para determinar de partirse a buscar aquellas tierras, si no trajesen aquéllos alguna buena nueva de lo que deseaban. Dice más el Almirante: «Esta gente es muy mansa y muy temerosa, desnuda como dicho tengo, sin armas y sin ley. Estas tierras son muy fértiles: ellos las tienen llenas de mames, que son como zanahorias, que tienen sabor de castañas, y tienen faxones y habas muy diversas de las nuestras y mucho algodón, el cual no siembran, y nacen por los montes árboles grandes, y creo que en todo tiempo lo hay para coger, porque vi los cogujos abiertos y otros que se abrían y flores todo en un árbol, y otras mil maneras de frutas que me no es posible escribir; y todo debe ser cosa provechosa.» Todo esto dice el Almirante.
Lunes, 5 de noviembre
En amaneciendo mandó poner la nao a monte y los otros navíos, pero no todos juntos, sino que quedasen siempre dos en el lugar donde estaban, por la seguridad, aunque dice que aquella gente era muy segura y sin temor se pudieran poner todos los navíos juntos en monte. Estando así vino el contramaestre de la Niña a pedir albricias al Almirante porque había hallado almáciga, mas no traía la muestra porque se le había caído. Prometióselas el Almirante y envió a Rodrigo Sánchez y a Maestre Diego a los árboles y trajeron un poco de ella, la cual guardó para llevar a los Reyes y también del árbol; y dice que se conoció que era almáciga, aunque se ha de coger a sus tiempos, y que había en aquella comarca para sacar mil quintales cada año. Halló dice que allí mucho de aquel palo que le pareció liñáloe. Dice más, que aquel puerto de Mares es de los mejores del mundo y mejores aires y más mansa gente, y porque tiene un cabo de peña altillo se puede hacer una fortaleza, para que si aquello saliese rico y cosa grande estarían allí los mercaderes seguros de cualquiera otras nacienes. Y dice: «Nuestro Señor, en cuyas manos están todas las victorias, aderezca todo lo que fuere a su servicio.» Dice que dijo un indio por señas que el almáciga era buena para cuando les dolía el estómago.
Martes, 6 de noviembre
Ayer en la noche, dice el Almirante, vinieron los dos hombres que había enviado a ver a la tierra dentro, y le dijeron cómo habían andado doce leguas que había hasta una población de cincuenta casas, donde dice que había mil vecinos, porque viven muchos en una casa. Estas casas son de manera de alfaneques grandísimos. Dijeron que los habían recibido con gran solemnidad, según su costumbre, y todos, así hombres como mujeres, los venían a ver, y aposentáronlos en las mejores casas; los cuales los tocaban y les besaban las manos y los pies, maravillándose y creyendo que venían del cielo, y así se lo daban a entender. Dábanles de comer de lo que tenían. Dijeron que en llegando los llevaron de brazos los más honrados del pueblo a la casa principal, y diéronles dos sillas en que se asentaron, y ellos todos se asentaron en el suelo en derredor de ellos. El indio que con ellos iba les notificó la manera de vivir de los cristianos y cómo eran buena gente. Después, saliéronse los hombres y entraron las mujeres, y sentáronse de la misma manera en derredor de ellos, besándoles las manos y los pies, atentándolos si eran de carne y de hueso como ellos. Rogábanles que se estuviesen allí con ellos al menos por cinco días. Mostraron la canela y pimienta y otras especias que el Almirante les había dado, y dijéronles por señas que mucha de ella había cerca de allí al Sudeste; pero que en allí no sabían si la había. Visto cómo no tenían recaudo de ciudades, se volvieron, y que si quisieran dar lugar a los que con ellos se querían venir, que más de quinientos hombres y mujeres vinieran con ellos, porque pensaban que se volvían al cielo. Vino empero, con ellos, un principal del pueblo y un su hijo y un hombre suyo. Habló con ellos el Almirante, hízoles mucha honra, señaló muchas tierras e islas que había en aquellas partes, pensó de traerlos a los Reyes, y dice que no supo qué se le antojó; parece que de miedo, y de noche oscuro quisose ir a tierra. Y el Almirante dice que porque tenía la nao en seco en tierra, no le queriendo enojar, le dejó ir, diciendo que en amaneciendo tornaría; el cual nunca tomó. Hallaron los dos cristianos por el camino mucha gente que atravesaba a sus pueblos, mujeres y hombres, con un tizón en la mano, hierbas para tomar sus sahumerios que acostumbra. No hallaron población por el camino de más de cinco casas, y todas les hacían el mismo acatamiento. Vieron muchas maneras de árboles e hierbas y flores odoríferas. Vieron aves de muchas maneras diversas de las de España, salvo perdices y ruiseñores que cantaban y ánsares, y de esto hay allí harto; bestias de cuatro pies no vieron, salvo perros que no ladraban La tierra muy fértil y muy labrada de aquellos mames y faxoes y habas muy diversas de las nuestras; eso mismo panizo y mucha cantidad de algodón cogido e hilado y obrado, y que en una sola casa habían visto más de quinientas arrobas y que se pudiera haber allí cada año cuatro mil quintales. Dice el Almirante que le parecía que no lo sembraban y que da fruto todo el año: es muy fino, tiene el capullo muy grande. Todo lo que aquella gente tenía dice que daba por muy vil precio, y que una gran espuerta de algodón daba por cabo de agujeta u otra cosa que se le dé. Son gente, dice el Almirante, muy sin mal ni guerra: desnudos todos, hombres y mujeres, como su madre los parió. Verdad es que las mujeres traen una cosa de algodón solamente tan grande que les cobija su natura y no más, y son ellas de muy buen acatamiento, ni muy negras, salvo menos que canarias. «Tengo por dicho, serenísimos Príncipes -dice el Almirante- que sabiendo la lengua dispuesta suya personas devotas religiosas, que luego todos se tornarían cristianos; y así espero en Nuestro Señor que Vuestras Altezas se determinarán a ello con mucha diligencia para tornar a la Iglesia tan grandes pueblos, y los convertirán, así como han destruido aquellos que no quisieron confesar el Padre y el Hijo y el Espíritu Santo; y después de sus días, que todos somos mortales, dejarán sus reinos en muy tranquilo estado y limpios de herejía y maldad, y serán bien recibidos delante del Eterno Criador, al cual plega de les dar larga vida y acrecentamiento grande de mayores reinos y señoríos y voluntad y disposición para acrecentar la santa religión cristiana, así como hasta aquí tienen hecho, amén. Hoy tiré la nao de monte y me despacho para partir el jueves en nombre de Dios e ir al Sudeste a buscar del oro y especierías y descubrir tierra.» Estas todas son palabras del Almirante, el cual pensó partir el jueves; pero porque le hizo el viento contrario no pudo partir hasta doce días de noviembre.
Lunes, 12 de noviembre
Partió del puerto y río de Mares al rendir del cuarto de alba para ir a una isla que mucho afirmaban los indios que traía, que se llamaba Babeque, adonde, según dicen por señas, que la gente de ella coge el oro con candelas de noche en la playa, y después con martillo dice que hacían vergas de ello, y para ir a ella era menester poner la proa al Este cuarta del Sudeste. Después de haber andado ocho leguas por la costa delante, halló un río que parecía muy caudaloso y mayor que ninguno de los otros que había hallado. No se quiso detener ni entrar en algunos de ellos por dos respectos: el uno y principal porque el tiempo y viento era bueno para ir en demanda de la dicha isla de Babeque; el otro, porque si en él hubiera alguna populosa o famosa ciudad cerca de la mar se pareciera, y para ir por el río arriba era menester navíos pequeños, lo que no eran los que llevaban; y así se perdiera también mucho tiempo, y los semejantes ríos son cosa para descubrirse por sí. Toda aquella costa era poblada mayormente cerca del río, a quien puso por nombre el río del Sol. Dijo que el domingo antes, 11 de noviembre, le había parecido que fuera bien tomar algunas personas de las de aquel río para llevar a los Reyes porque aprendieran nuestra lengua, para saber lo que hay en la tierra y porque volviendo sean lenguas de los cristianos y tomen nuestras costumbres y las cosas de la Fe, «porque yo vi y conozco -dice el Almirante- que esta gente no tiene secta ninguna ni son idólatras, salvo muy mansos y sin saber qué sea mal ni matar a otros ni prender, y sin armas y tan temerosos que a una persona de los nuestros huyen ciento de ellos, aunque burlen con ellos, y crédulos y conocedores que hay Dios en el cielo, y firmes que nosotros habemos venido del cielo, y muy presto a cualquiera oración que nos les digamos que digan y hacen el señal de la cruz. Así que deben Vuestras Altezas determinarse a los hacer cristianos, que creo que si comienzan, en poco tiempo acabarán de los haber convertido a nuestra Santa Fe multidumbre de pueblos, y cobrando grandes señoríos y riqueza y todos sus pueblos de la España, porque sin duda es en estas tierras grandísimas sumas de oro, que no sin causa dicen estos indios que yo traigo, que hay en estas islas lugares adonde cavan el oro y lo traen al pescuezo, a las orejas y a los brazos y a las piernas, y son manillas muy gruesas, y también hay piedras y hay perlas preciosas e infinitas especierías; y en este río de Mares, de donde partí esta noche, sin duda hay grandísima cantidad de almáciga y mayor si mayor se quisiere hacer, porque los mismos árboles plantándolos prenden de ligero y hay muchos y muy grandes y tienen la hoja como lentisco y el fruto, salvo que es mayor, así los árboles como la hoja, como dice Plinio, y yo he visto en la isla de Xío, en el Archipiélago, y mandé sangrar muchos de estos árboles para ver si echarían resma para traer, y como haya siempre llovido el tiempo que yo he estado en el dicho río, no he podido haber de ella, salvo muy poquita que traigo a Vuestras Altezas, y también puede ser que conviene al tiempo que los árboles comienzan a salir del invierno y quieren echar la flor; y acá ya tienen el fruto casi maduro ahora. Y también aquí se habría grande suma de algodón y creo que se vendería muy bien acá sin le llevar a España, salvo a las grandes ciudades del Gran Can que se des cubrirán sin duda y otras muchas de otros señores que habrán en dicha servir a Vuestras Altezas, y adonde se les darán de otras cosas de España y de las tierras de Oriente, pues éstas son a nos en Poniente. Y aquí hay también infinito liñáloe, aunque no es cosa para hacer gran caudal, mas del almáciga es de entender bien, porque no la hay salvo en dicha isla de Xío, y creo que sacan de ello bien cincuenta mil ducados, si mal no me acuerdo. Y hay aquí, en la boca de dicho río, el mejor puerto que hasta hoy vi, limpio y ancho y hondo y buen lugar y asiento para hacer una villa y fuerte, y que cualesquier navíos se puedan llegar el bordo a los muros, y tierra muy temperada y alta y muy buenas aguas. Así que ayer vino a bordo de la nao una almadía con seis mancebos, y los cinco entraron en la nao; estos mandé detener y los traigo. Y después envié a una casa que es de la parte del río del Poniente, y trajeron siete cabezas de mujeres entre chicas y grandes y tres niños. Esto hice porque mejor se comportan los hombres en España habiendo mujeres de su tierra que sin ellas, porque ya otras muchas veces se acaeció traer los hombres de Guinea para que aprendiesen la lengua en Portugal, y después que volvían y pensaban de se aprovechar de ellos en su tierra por la buena compañía que les había hecho y dádivas que se les había dado, en llegando en tierra jamás parecían. Otros no lo hacían así. Así que, teniendo sus mujeres, tendrán ganas de negociar lo que se les encargare, y también estas mujeres mucho enseñarán a los nuestros su lengua, la cual es toda una en todas estas islas de India, y todos se entienden y todas las andan con sus almadías, lo que no han en Guinea, adonde es mil maneras de lenguas que la una no entiende la otra. Esta noche vino a bordo en una almadía el marido de una de estas mujeres y padre de tres hijos, un macho y dos hembras, y dijo que yo le dejase venir con ellos, y a mí me aplogó mucho, y quedan ahora todos consolados con el que deben todos ser parientes, y él es ya hombre de cuarenta y cinco años.» Todas estas palabras son formales del Almirante. Dice también arriba que hacía algún frío, y por esto que no le fuera buen consejo en invierno navegar al Norte para descubrir. Navegó este lunes, hasta el sol puesto, dieciocho leguas al Este cuarta del Sudeste hasta un cabo, al que puso por nombre el Cabo de Cuba.
Martes, 13 de noviembre
Esta noche toda estuvo a la corda, como dicen los marineros, que es andar barloventeando y no andar nada, por ver un abra, que es una abertura de sierras como entre sierra y sierra, que le comenzó a ver al poner del sol, adonde se mostraban dos grandísimas montañas, y parecía que se apartaba la tierra de Cuba con aquella de Bohío, y esto decían los indios que consigo llevaban, por señas. Venido el día claro, dio las velas sobre la tierra y pasó una punta que le pareció anoche obra de dos leguas, y entró en un grande golfo, cinco leguas al Sursudoeste, y le quedaban otras cinco para llegar al cabo adonde, en medio de dos grandes montes, hacía un degollado, el cual no pudo determinar si era entrada de mar. Y porque deseaba ir a la isla que llamaban Babeque, adonde tenía nueva, según él entendía, que había mucho oro, la cual isla le salía al Este, como no vio alguna grande población para ponerse al rigor del viento que le crecía más que nunca hasta allí, acordó de hacerse a la mar y andar al Este con el viento que era Norte; y andaba ocho millas cada hora, y desde las diez del día que tomó aquella derrota hasta el poner del sol anduvo cincuenta y seis millas, que son catorce leguas al Este, desde el Cabo de Cuba. Y de la otra tierra del Bohío que le quedaba a sotaviento comenzando del cabo del sobredicho golfo, descubrió a su parecer ochenta millas, que son veinte leguas, y corriase toda aquella costa Essueste y Oesnoroeste.
Miércoles, 14 de noviembre
Toda la noche de ayer anduvo al reparo y barloventeando (porque decía que no era razón de navegar entre aquellas islas de noche hasta que las hubiese descubierto), porque los indios que traía le dijeron ayer martes que habría tres jornadas desde el río de Mares hasta la isla de Babeque, que se debe entender jornadas de sus almadías, que pueden andar siete leguas, y el viento también le escaseaba, y habiendo de ir al Este no podía sino a la cuarta del Sudeste, y por otros inconvenientes que allí refiere se hubo de detener hasta la mañana. Al salir del sol determinó de ir a buscar puerto, porque de Norte se había mudado el viento al Nordeste, y si puerto no hallara fuérale necesario volver atrás a los puertos que dejaba en la isla de Cuba. Llegó a tierra habiendo andado aquella noche veinticuatro millas al Este cuarta del Sudeste. Anduvo al Sur... millas hasta tierra, adonde vio muchas entradas y muchas isletas y puertos, y porque el viento era mucho y la mar muy alterada no osó acometer a entrar; antes corrió por la costa al Noroeste cuarta del Oeste, mirando si había puerto, y vio que había muchos, pero no muy claros. Después de haber andado así sesenta y cuatro millas halló una entrada muy honda, ancha un cuarto de muía, y buen puerto y río, donde entró y puso la popa al Sursudoeste y después al Sur hasta llegar al Sudeste, todo de buena anchura y muy hondo, donde vio tantas islas que no las pudo contar todas, de buena grandeza y muy altas tierras llenas de diversos árboles de mil maneras e infinitas palmas. Maravillóse en gran manera al ver tantas islas y tan altas, y certifica a los Reyes que las montañas que desde anteayer ha visto por estas costas y las de estas islas que le parece que no las hay más altas en el mundo ni tan hermosas y claras, sin niebla ni nieve, y al pie de ellas grandísimo fondo; y dice que cree que estas islas son aquellas innumerables que en los mapamundos en fin de Oriente se ponen. Y dijo que creía que había grandísimas riquezas y piedras preciosas y especiería en ellas, y que duran muy mucho al Sur y se ensanchan a toda parte. Púsoles nombre la mar de Nuestra Señora, y al puerto que está cerca de la boca de la entrada de las dichas islas puso puerto del Príncipe, en el cual no entró, mas de verlo desde fuera hasta otra vuelta que dio el sábado de la semana venidera, como allí aparecerá. Dice tantas y tales cosas de la fertilidad y hermosura y altura de estas islas que hailó en este puerto, que dice a los Reyes que no se maravillen de encarecerías tanto, porque les certifica que cree que no dice la centésima parte: algunas de ellas que parecía que llegan al cielo y hechas como puntas de diamantes; otras que sobre su gran altura tienen encima como una mesa y al pie de ellas fondo grandísimo, que podrá llegar a ellas una grandísima carraca todas llenas de arboledas y sin peñas.
Jueves, 15 de noviembre
Acordó de andarías estas islas con las barcas de los navíos, y dice maravillas de ellas y que halió almáciga e infinito liñáloe, y algunas de ellas eran labradas de las raíces de que hacen su pan los indios, y halló haber encendido fuego en algunos lugares. Agua dulce no vio; gente había alguna y huyeron. En todo lo que anduvo halló fondo de quince y dieciséis brazas, y todo basa, que quiere decir que el suelo de abajo es arena y no peñas, lo que mucho desean los marineros, porque las peñas cortan los cables de las anclas de las naos.
Viernes, 16 de noviembre
Porque en todas las partes, islas y tierras donde entraba dejaba siempre puesta una cruz, entró en la barca y fue a la boca de aquellos puertos y en una punta de la tierra halló dos maderos muy grandes, uno más largo que el otro y el uno sobre el otro hechos una cruz, que dice que un carpintero no los pudiera poner más proporcionados; y, adorada aquella cruz, mandó hacer de los mismos maderos una muy grande y alta cruz. Halló cañas por aquella playa que no sabía dónde nacían, y creía que las traería algún río y las echaba a la playa, y tenía en esto razón. Fue a una caía dentro de la entrada del puerto de la parte del sudeste (caía es una entrada angosta que entra el agua del mar en la tierra): allí hacía un alto de piedra y peña como cabo y al pie de él era muy hondo, que la mayor carraca del mundo pudiera poner el bordo en tierra, y había un lugar o rincón donde podían estar seis navíos sin anclas como en una caía. Parecióle que se podía hacer allí una fortaleza a poca costa, si en algún tiempo en aquella mar de islas resultase algún rescate famoso. Volviéndose a la nao, halló los indios que consigo traía que pescaban caracoles muy grandes que en aquellas mares hay, e hizo entrar la gente allí y buscar si había nácaras, que son las ostras donde se crían las perlas, y hallaron muchas, pero no perlas, y atribuyó a que no debía de ser el tiempo de ellas; que creía él que era por mayo y junio. Hallaron los marineros un animal que parecía taso o taxo. Pescaron también con redes y hallaron un pez, entre otros muchos, que parecía un propio puerco, no como tonina, el cual dice que era todo concha muy tiesta y no tenía cosa blanda sino la cola y los ojos, y un agujero debajo de ella para expeler sus superfluidades. Mandólo salar para llevarlo que viesen los Reyes.
Sábado, 17 de noviembre
Entró en la barca por la mañana y fue a ver las islas que no había visto por la banda del Sudoeste. Vio muchas otras y muy fértiles y muy graciosas, y entre medio de ellas muy gran fondo: algunas de ellas dividían arroyos de agua dulce, y creía que aquella agua y arroyos salían de algunas fuentes que manaban en los altos de las sierras de las islas. De aquí yendo adelante, halló una ribera de agua muy hermosa y dulce, y salía muy fría por lo enjuto de ella: había un prado muy lindo y palmas muchas y altísimas más que las que había visto. Halló nueces grandes de las de India, creo que dice, y ratones grandes de los de India también y cangrejos grandísimos. Aves vio muchas y olor vehemente de almizque, y creyó que lo debía de haber allí. Este día, de seis mancebos que tomó en el río de Mares, que mandó que fuesen en la carabela Niña, se huyeron los dos más viejos.
Domingo, 18 de noviembre
Salió en las barcas otra vez con mucha gente de los navíos y fue a poner la gran cruz que había mandado hacer de los dichos dos maderos a la boca de la entrada de dicho puerto del Príncipe, en un lugar vistoso y descubierto de árboles: ella muy alta y muy hermosa vista. Dice que la mar crece y descrece allí mucho más que en otro puerto de lo que por aquella tierra haya visto, y que no es más maravilla por las muchas islas, y que la marea es al revés de las nuestras, porque allí la luna al Sudoeste cuarta del Sur es bajamar en aquel puerto. No partió de aquí por ser domingo.
Lunes, 19 de noviembre
Partió antes que el sol saliese y con calma; y después al medio día ventó algo el Este y navegó al Nornordeste. Al poner del sol le quedaba el puerto del Príncipe al Sursudoeste, y estaría de él siete leguas. Vio la isla de Babeque al Este justo, de la cual estaría sesenta millas. Navegó toda esta noche al Nordeste escaso, andaría sesenta millas y hasta las diez del día martes otras doce, que son por todas diez y ocho leguas, y al Nordeste cuarta del Norte.
Martes, 20 de noviembre
Quedábanle el Babeque o las islas del Babeque al Essueste, de donde salía el viento que llevaba contrario. Y viendo que no se mudaba y la mar se alteraba, determinó de dar la vuelta al puerto del Príncipe, de donde había salido, que le quedaba veinticinco leguas. No quiso ir a la isleta que llamó Isabela, que le estaba doce leguas, que pudiera ir a surgir aquel día, por dos razones. La una porque vio dos islas al Sur: las quería ver; la otra porque los indios que traía, que había tomado en Guanahaní, que llamó San Salvador, que estaba a ocho leguas de aquella Isabela, no se le fuesen, de los cuales dice que tiene necesidad y por traerlos a Castilla, etc. Tenían dice que entendido que en hallando oro los había el Almirante de dejar tornar a su tierra. Llegó en paraje del puerto del Príncipe; pero no lo pudo tomar, porque era de noche y porque le decayeron las corrientes al Noroeste. Tomó a dar la vuelta y puso la proa al Nordeste con viento recio; amansó y mudóse el viento al tercero cuarto de la noche, puso la proa en el Este cuarta del Nordeste: el viento era Sursudeste y mudóse al alba de todo en Sur, y tocaba en el Sudeste. Salido el sol marcó el puerto del Príncipe, y quedábale al Sudoeste y casi a la cuarta del Oeste, y estaría de él a cuarenta y ocho millas, que son doce leguas.
Miércoles, 21 de noviembre
Al sol salido navegó al Este con viento Sur; anduvo poco por la mar contraria. Hasta horas de vísperas hubo andado veinticuatro millas. Después se mudó el viento al Este y anduvo al Sur cuarta del Sudeste, y al poner del sol había andado doce millas. Allí se halló el Almirante en cuarenta y dos grados de la línea equinoccial a la parte del Norte, como en el puerto de Mares; pero aquí dice que tiene suspenso el cuadrante hasta llegar a tierra que lo adobe 118 Por manera que le parecía que no debía distar tanto, y tenía razón, porque no era posible como no estén estas islas sino en... 119 grados. Para creer que el cuadrante andaba bueno le movía ver dice que el Norte tan alto como en Castilla, y si esto es verdad mucho allegado y alto andaba con la Florida; pero ¿dónde están luego ahora estas islas que entre manos traía? Ayudaba a esto que hacia dice que gran calor; pero claro es que si estuviera en la costa de Florida que no hubiera calor sino frío. Y es también manifiesto que en cuarenta y dos grados en ninguna parte de la tierra se cree hacer calor, y si no fuese por alguna causa de per accidens, lo que hasta hoy no creo yo que se sabe. Por este calor que allí el Almirante dice que padecía, arguye que en estas Indias y por allí donde andaba debía de haber mucho oro. Este día se apartó Martín Alonso Pinzón con la carabela Pinta, sin obediencia y voluntad del Almirante, por codicia, dice que pensando que un indio que el Almirante había mandado poner en aquella carabela le había de dar mucho oro, y así se fue sin esperar, sin causa de mal tiempo, sino porque quiso. Y dice aquí el Almirante: «otras muchas me tiene hecho y dicho»
Jueves, 22 de noviembre
Miércoles en la noche navegó al Sur cuarta del Sudeste con el viento Este, y era casi calma. Al tercer cuarto ventó Nornordeste. Todavía iba al Sur por ver aquella tierra que por allí le quedaba, y cuando salió el sol se halló tan lejos como el día pasado por las corrientes contrarias, y quedábale la tierra a cuarenta millas. Esta noche Martín Alonso siguió el camino del Este para ir a la isla de Babeque, donde dicen los indios que hay mucho oro, el cual iba a vista del Almirante, y habría hasta él dieciséis millas. Anduvo el Almirante toda la noche la vuelta de tierra e hizo tomar algunas de las velas y tener farol toda la noche, porque le pareció que venía hacia él, y la noche hizo muy clara y el vientecillo bueno para venir a él.
Viernes, 23 de noviembre
Navegó el Almirante todo el día hacia la tierra, al Sur siempre, con poco viento, y la corriente nunca le dejó llegar a ella, antes estaba hoy tan lejos de ella al poner del sol como en la mañana. El viento era Esnordeste y razonable para ir al Sur, sino que era poco; y sobre este cabo encabalga otra tierra o cabo que va también al Este, a quien aquellos indios que llevaba llamaban Bohío, la cual decían que era muy grande y que había en ella gente que tenía un ojo en la frente, y otros que se llamaban caníbales, a quien mostraban tener gran miedo. Y desde que vieron que lleva este camino, dice que no podían hablar, porque los comían y que son gente muy armada. El Almirante dice que bien cree que había algo de ello, mas que, pues eran armados, serían gente de razón, y creía que habrían cautivado algunos y que porque no volvían dirían que los comían. Lo mismo creían de los cristianos y del Almirante al principio que algunos los vieron.
Sábado, 24 de noviembre
Navegó aquella noche toda, y a la hora de tercia del día tomó la tierra sobre la isla Llana, en aquel mismo lugar donde había arribado la semana pasada cuando iba a la isla de Babeque. Al principio no osó llegar a la tierra, porque le parecía que aquella abra de sierras rompía la mar mucho en ella. Y en fin llegó a la mar de Nuestra Señora, donde había las muchas islas, y entró en el puerto que está junto a la boca de la entrada de las islas, y dice que si él antes supiera este puerto y no se ocupara en ver las islas de la mar de Nuestra Señora, no le fuera necesario volver atrás, aunque dice que lo da por bien empleado por haber visto las dichas islas. Así que llegando a tierra envió la barca y tentó el puerto y halló muy buena barra, honda de seis brazas hasta veinte y limpio, todo basa. Entró en él, poniendo la proa al Sudoeste y después volviendo al Oeste, quedando la isla Llana de la parte del Norte, la cual, con otra su vecina, hacen una laguna de mar en que cabrían todas las naos de España y podían estar seguras, sin amarras, de todos los vientos. Y esta entrada de la parte del Sudeste, que se entra poniendo la proa al Sursudoeste, tiene la salida al Oeste muy honda y muy ancha; así que se puede pasar entremedio de las dichas islas; y por conocimiento de ellas a quien viniese de la mar de la parte del Norte, que es su travesía de esta costa, están las dichas islas al pie de una grande montaña que es su longura de Este Oeste, y es harto luenga y más alta y luenga que ninguna de todas las otras que están en esta costa, adonde hay infinitas; y hace fuera una restinga al luengo de la dicha montaña como un banco que llega hasta la entrada. Todo esto de la parte del Sudeste, y también de la parte de la isla Llana hace otra restinga, aunque ésta es pequeña, y así entremedias de ambas hay grande anchura y fondo grande, como dicho es. Luego a la entrada, a la parte del Sudeste, dentro en el mismo puerto, vieron un río grande y muy hermoso y de más agua que hasta entonces habían visto, y que venía el agua dulce hasta la mar. A la entrada tiene un banco, mas después adentro es muy hondo de ocho y nueve brazas. Está todo lleno de palmas y de muchas arboledas como los otros.
Domingo, 25 de noviembre
Antes del sol salido entró en la barca y fue a ver un cabo o punta de tierra al Sudeste de la isleta Llana, obra de una legua y media, porque le parecía que había de haber algún río bueno. Luego, a la entrada del cabo de la parte del Sudeste, andando dos tiros de ballesta, vio venir un grande arroyo de muy linda agua que descendía de una montaña abajo y hacía gran ruido. Fue al río y vio en él unas piedras relucir, con unas manchas en ellas de color de oro, y acordándose que en el río Tejo, al pie de él, junto a la mar, se halla oro, y parecióle que cierto debía tener oro, y mandó coger ciertas de aquellas piedras para llevar a los Reyes. Estando así dan voces los mozos grumetes, diciendo que veían pinales Miró por la sierra y viólos tan grandes y maravillosos que no podía encarecer su altura y derechura como husos gordos y delgados, donde conoció que se podían hacer navíos e infinita tablazón y mástiles para las mayores naos de España. Vio robles y madroños, y un buen río y aparejo para hacer sierras de agua. La tierra y los aires más templados que hasta allí, por la altura y hermosura de las sierras. Vio por la playa muchas otras piedras de color de hierro, y otras que decían algunos que eran Ininas de plata, todas las cuales trae el río. Allí cogió una entena y mástil para la mesana de la carabela Niña. Llegó a la boca del río y entró en una cala al pie de aquel cabo de la parte del Sudeste muy honda y grande, en que cabrían cien naos sin alguna amarra ni anclas; y el puerto, que los ojos otro tal nunca vieron. Las sierras altísimas, de las cuales descendían muchas aguas lindísimas; y todas las sierras llenas de pinos y por todo aquello diversísimas y hermosísimas florestas de árboles. Otros dos o tres ríos le quedaban atrás. Encarece todo esto en gran manera a los Reyes y muestra haber recibido de verlo, y mayormente los pinos, inestimable alegría y gozo, porque se podían hacer allí cuantos navíos desearen, trayendo los aderezos, si no fuere madera y pez, que allí se hará harta; y afirma no encarecerlo la centésima parte de lo que es, y que plugo a Nuestro Señor de le mostrar siempre una cosa mejor que otra, y siempre en lo que hasta aquí había descubierto iba de bien en mejor, así en las tierras y arboledas y hierbas y frutos y flores como en las gentes, y siempre de diversa manera, y así en un lugar como en otro, lo mismo en los puertos y en las aguas. Y finalmente dice que, cuando el que lo ve le es tanta la admiración, cuánto más será a quien lo oyere, y que nadie lo podrá creer si no lo viere.
Lunes, 26 de noviembre
Al salir el sol levantó las anclas del puerto de Santa Catalina, adonde estaba dentro de la isla Llana, y navegó de luengo de la costa con poco viento Sudoeste al camino del Cabo del Pico, que era al Sudeste. Llegó al Cabo tarde, porque le calmó el viento, y, llegado, vio al Sudeste cuarta del Este otro cabo que estaría de él sesenta millas, y de allí vio otro cabo que estaría hacia el navío al Sudeste cuarta del Sur, y parecióle que estaría de él veinte millas, al cual puso nombre el Cabo de Campana, al cual no pudo llegar de día porque le tornó a calmar del todo el viento. Andaría en todo aquel día treinta y dos millas, que son ocho leguas; dentro de las cuales notó y marcó nueve puertos muy señalados, los cuales todos los marineros hacían maravillas, y cinco ríos grandes, porque iba siempre junto con tierra para verlo bien todo. Toda aquella tierra es montañas altísimas muy hermosas, y no secas ni de peñas sino todas andables y valles hermosísimos. Y así los valles como las montañas eran llenos de árboles altos y frescos, que es gloria mirarlos, y parecía que eran muchos pinales. Y también detrás del dicho Cabo del Pico, de la parte del Sudeste, están dos isletas que tendrán cada una en cerco dos leguas y dentro de ellas tres maravillosos puertos y dos grandes ríos. En toda esta costa no vio poblado ninguno desde la mar; podría ser haberlo, y hay señales de ello, porque donde quiera que saltaban en tierra hallaban señales de haber gente y fuegos muchos. Estimaba que la tierra que hoy vio de la parte Sudeste del Cabo de Campana era la isla que llamaban los indios Bohío: parécelo porque el dicho cabo está apartado de aquella tierra. Toda la gente que hasta hoy ha hallado dice que tiene grandísimo temor de los Caniba o Canima, y dicen que viven en esta isla de Bohío, la cual debe ser muy grande, según le parece y cree que van a tomar a aquellos a sus tierras y casas, como sean muy cobardes y no saber de armas. Y a esta causa le parecía que aquellos indios que traía no suelen poblarse a la costa de la mar, por ser vecinos a esta tierra, los cuales dice que después que le vieron tomar la vuelta de esta tierra no podían hablar temiendo que los habían de comer, y no les podía quitar el temor, y decían que no tenían sino un ojo y la cara de perro, y creía el Almirante que mentían, y sentía el Almirante que debían de ser del señorío del Gran Can, que los cautivaban.
Martes, 27 de noviembre
Ayer al poner del sol llegó cerca de un cabo, que llamó Campana, y porque el cielo claro y el viento poco no quiso ir a tierra a surgir, aunque tenía de sotavento cinco o seis puertos maravillosos, porque se detenía más de lo que quería por el apetito y deleitación que tenía y recibía de ver y mirar la hermosura y frescura de aquellas tierras donde quiera que entraba, y por no se tardar en proseguir lo que pretendía. Por estas razones se tuvo aquella noche a la corda y temporejar hasta el día. Y porque los aguajes y corrientes lo habían echado aquella noche más de cinco o seis leguas al Sudeste adelante de donde había anochecido y le había parecido la tierra de Campana; y allende aquel cabo parecía una grande entrada que mostraba dividir una tierra de otra y hacía como isla en medio, acordó volver atrás con viento Sudoeste, y vino adonde le había parecido la abertura, y halló que no era sino una grande bahía, y al cabo de ella, de la parte del Sudeste, un cabo, en el cual hay una montaña alta y cuadrada que parecía isla. Saltó el viento en el Norte y tomó a tomar la vuelta del Sudeste, por correr la costa y descubrir todo lo que allí hubiese. Y vio luego al pie de aquel Cabo de Campana un puerto maravilloso y un gran río, y de allí a un cuarto de legua otro río, y de allí a media legua otro río, y dende a media legua otro río, y dende a otra otro río, y dende a otro cuarto, otro río, y dende a otra legua otro río grande, desde el cual hasta el Cabo de Campana habría veinte millas, y le quedaban al Sudeste. Y los más de estos ríos tenían grandes entradas y anchas y limpias, con sus puertos maravillosos para naos grandísimas, sin bancos de arena ni de peña ni restingas. Viniendo así por la costa a la parte del Sudeste del dicho postrero río halló una grande población, la mayor que hasta hoy haya hallado, y vio venir infinita gente a la ribera de la mar dando grandes voces, todos desnudos, con sus azagayas en la mano. Deseó hablar con ellos y amainó las velas, y surgió y envió las barcas de la nao y de la carabela por manera ordenados que no hiciesen daño alguno a los indios ni lo recibiesen, mandando que les diesen algunas cosillas de aquellos rescates. Los indios hicieron ademanes de no los dejar saltar en tierra y resistirlos. Y viendo que las barcas se allegaban más a tierra y que no les habían miedo, se apartaron de la mar. Y creyendo que saliendo dos o tres hombres de las barcas no temieran, salieron dos cristianos diciendo que no hubiesen miedo en su lengua, porque sabían algo de ella por la conversación de los que traen consigo. En fin, dieron todos a huir, que ni grande ni chico quedó. Fueron los tres cristianos a las casas, que son de paja y de la hechura de las otras que habían visto, y no hallaron a nadie ni cosa en alguna de ellas. Volviéronse a los navíos y alzaron velas a mediodía, para ir a un cabo hermoso que quedaba al Este, que habría hasta él ocho leguas. Habiendo andado media legua por la misma bahía, vio el Almirante a la parte del Sur un singularísimo puerto, y de la parte del Sudeste unas tierras hermosas a maravilla, así como una vega montuosa dentro en estas montañas, y parecían grandes humos y grandes poblaciones en ella, y las tierras muy labradas; por lo cual determinó de se bajar a este puerto y probar si podía haber lengua o práctica con ellos, el cual era tal que, si a los otros puertos había alabado, éste dice que alababa más con las tierras y templanza y comarca de ellas y población. Dice maravillas de la lindeza de la tierra y de los árboles, donde hay pinos y palmas, y de la grande vega, que aunque no es llana de llano que va al Sursudeste, pero es llana de montes llanos y bajos, la más hermosa cosa del mundo, y salen por ella muchas riberas de agua que descienden de estas montañas. Después de surgida la nao, saltó el Almirante en la barca para sondear el puerto, que es como una escudilla; y cuando fue frontero de la boca al Sur halló una entrada de un río que tenía de anchura que podía entrar una galera por ella y de tal manera que no se veía hasta que se llegase a ella y, entrando por ella tanto como longura de la barca tenía cinco brazas y de ocho de hondo. Andando por ella fue cosa maravillosa ver las arboledas y frescuras y el agua clarísima y las aves y la amenidad, que dice que le parecía que no quisiera salir de allí. Iba diciendo a los hombres que llevaba en su compañía que para hacer relación a los Reyes de las cosas que veían no bastaran mil lenguas a referirlo ni su mano para lo escribir, que le parecía que estaba encantado. Deseaba que aquello vieran muchas otras personas prudentes y de crédito, de las cuales dice ser cierto que no encarecieran estas cosas menos que él. Dice más el Almirante aquí estas palabras: «Cuánto será el beneficio que de aquí se puede haber, yo no lo escribo. Es cierto, Señores Príncipes, que donde hay tales tierras que debe haber infinitas cosas de provecho, mas yo no me detengo en ningún puerto, porque querría ver todas las más tierras que yo pudiese para hacer relación de ellas a Vuestras Altezas, y también no sé la lengua, y la gente de estas tierras no me entienden, ni yo ni otro que yo tenga a ellos. Y estos indios que yo traigo muchas veces les entiendo una cosa por otra al contrario, ni fío mucho de ellos, porque muchas veces han probado a huir. Mas ahora, placiendo a Nuestro Señor, veré lo más que yo pudiere, y poco a poco andaré entendiendo y conociendo y haré enseñar esta lengua a personas de mi casa, porque veo que es toda lengua una hasta aquí; y después se sabrán los beneficios y se trabajará de hacer todos estos pueblos cristianos porque de ligero se hará, porque ellos no tienen secta ninguna ni son idólatras, y Vuestras Altezas mandarán hacer en estas partes ciudad y fortaleza y se convertirán estas tierras. Y certifico a Vuestras Altezas que debajo del sol no me parece que las pueda haber mejores en fertilidad, en temperancia de frío y calor, en abundancia de aguas buenas y sanas, y no como los ríos de Guinea, que son todos pestilencia, porque, loado Nuestro Señor, hasta hoy de toda mi gente no ha habido persona que le haya mal de cabeza ni estado en cama por dolencia, salvo un viejo de dolor de piedra, de que él estaba toda su vida apasionado, y luego sanó al cabo de dos días. Esto que digo es en todos tres navíos. Así que placerá a Dios que Vuestras Altezas enviarán acá o vendrán hombres doctos y verán después la verdad de todo. Y porque atrás tengo hablado del sitio de villa y fortaleza en el río de Mares, por el buen puerto y por la comarca, es cierto que todo es verdad lo que yo dije, mas no hay ninguna comparación de allá aquí, ni de la mar de Nuestra Señora; porque aquí debe haber infra la tierra grandes poblaciones y gente innumerable y cosas de grande provecho, porque aquí y en todo lo otro descubierto y tengo esperanza de descubrir antes que yo vaya a Castilla, digo que tendrá la cristiandad negociación en ellas, cuanto más la España, a quien debe estar sujeto todo. Y digo que Vuestras Altezas no deben consentir que aquí trate ni haga pie ningún extranjero, salvo católicos cristianos, pues esto fue el fin y el comienzo del propósito, que fuese por acrecentamiento y gloria de la religión cristiana, ni venir a estas partes ninguno que no sea buen cristiano.» Todas son sus palabras. Subió allí por el río arriba y halló unos brazos del río, y, rodeando el puerto, halló a la boca del río estaban unas arboledas muy graciosas, como una muy deleitable huerta, y allí halló una almadía o canoa, hecha de un madero tan grande como una fusta de doce bancos, muy hermosa, varada debajo de una atarazana o ramada hecha de madera y cubierta de grandes hojas de palma, por manera que ni el sol ni el agua le podían hacer daño. Y dice que allí era el propio lugar para hacer una villa o ciudad y fortaleza por el buen puerto, buenas aguas y tierras, buenas comarcas y mucha leña.
Miércoles, 28 de noviembre
Estúvose en aquel puerto aquel día porque llovía y hacía gran cerrazón, aunque podía correr toda la costa con el viento, que era Sudoeste; y fuera a popa, pero porque no pudiera ver bien la tierra, y no sabiéndola es peligroso a los navíos, no se partió. Salieron a tierra la gente de los navíos y entraron algunos de ellos un rato por la tierra adentro a lavar su ropa. Hallaron grandes poblaciones y las casas vacías, porque se habían huido todos. Tornáronse por otro río abajo, mayor que aquel donde estaban en el puerto.
Jueves, 29 de noviembre
Porque llovía y el cielo estaba de la manera cerrado, no se partió. Llegaron algunos de los cristianos a otra población cerca de la parte de Noroeste, y no hallaron en las casas a nadie ni nada. Y en el camino toparon con un viejo que no les pudo huir; tomáronle y dijéronle que no le querían hacer mal, y diéronle algunas cosillas del rescate y dejáronlo. El Almirante quisiera verlo para vestirlo y tomar lengua de él, porque le contentaba mucho la felicidad de aquella tierra y disposición que para poblar en ella había, y juzgaba que debía de haber grandes poblaciones. Hallaron en una casa un pan de cera, que trajo a los Reyes, y dice que donde cera hay también debe haber otras mil cosas buenas. Hallaron también los marineros en una casa una cabeza de hombre dentro de un cestillo cubierto con otro cestillo y colgado de un poste de la casa, y de la misma manera hallaron otra en otra población.Creyó el Almirante que debía ser de algunos Principales de linaje, porque aquellas casas eran de manera que se acogen en ellas mucha gente en una sola, y deben ser parientes descendientes de uno solo.
Viernes, 30 de noviembre
No se pudo partir, porque el viento era Levante muy contrario a su camino. Envió ocho hombres bien armados y con ellos dos indios de los que traía, para que viesen aquellos pueblos de la tierra dentro y por haber lengua. Llegaron a muchas casas y no hallaron a nadie ni nada, que todos se habían huido. Vieron cuatro mancebos que estaban cavando en sus heredades. Así como vieron los cristianos dieron a huir; no los pudieron alcanzar. Anduvieron dice que mucho camino. Vieron muchas poblaciones y tierra fertilísima y toda labrada y grandes riberas de agua, y cerca de una vieron una almadía o canoa de noventa y cinco palmos de longura de un solo madero, muy hermosa, y que en ella cabrían y navegarían ciento cincuenta personas.
Sábado, 1 de diciembre
No se partió, por la misma causa del viento contrario y porque llovía mucho. Asentó una cruz grande a la entrada de aquel puerto que creo llamó el Puerto Santo, sobre unas peñas vivas. La punta es aquella que está a la parte del Sudeste, a la entrada del puerto, y quien hubiere de entrar en este puerto se debe llegar más sobre la parte del Noroeste a aquella punta que sobre la otra del Sudeste; puesto que al pie de ambas, junto con la peña, hay doce brazas de hondo y muy limpio. Más a la entrada del puerto, sobre la punta del Sudeste, hay una baja que sobreagua, la cual dista de la punta tanto que se podría pasar entre medias, habiendo necesidad, porque al pie de la baja y del cabo todo es fondo de doce y de quince brazas, y a la entrada se ha de poner la proa al Sudoeste.
Domingo, 2 de diciembre
Todavía fue contrario el viento y no pudo partir; dice que todas las noches del mundo vienta terral, y que todas las naos que allí estuvieren no hayan miedo de toda la tormenta del mundo, porque no puede recalar dentro por una baja que está al principio del puerto, etc. En la boca de aquel río dice que halló un grumete ciertas piedras que parecen tener oro; trájolas para mostrar a los Reyes. Dice que hay por allí, a tiro de lombarda, grandes ríos.
Lunes, 3 de diciembre
Por causa de que hacía siempre tiempo contrario, no partía de aquel puerto, y acordó de ir a ver un cabo muy hermoso un cuarto de legua del puerto de la parte del Sudeste. Fue con las barcas y alguna gente armada. Al pie del cabo había una boca de un buen río, puesta la proa al Sudeste para entrar, y tenía cien pasos de anchura; tenía una braza de fondo a la entrada o en la boca; pero dentro había doce brazas, y cinco, y cuatro, y dos, y cabrían en él cuantos navíos hay en España. Dejando un brazo de aquel río fue al Sudeste y halló una caleta en que vio cinco muy grandes almadías que los indios llaman canoas, como fustas muy hermosas y labradas que dice era placer verlas, y al pie del monte vio todo labrado. Estaban debajo de árboles muy espesos, y yendo por un camino que salía a ellas fueron a dar a una atarazana muy bien ordenada y cubierta, que ni sol ni agua no les podía hacer daño, y debajo de ella había otra canoa hecha de un madero como las otras, como una fusta de diecisiete bancos. Era placer ver las labores que tenía y su hermosura. Subió una montaña arriba y después hallóla toda llana y sembrada de muchas cosas de la tierra y calabazas, que era gloria verla; y en medio de ella estaba una gran población. Dio de súbito sobre la gente del pueblo, y, como los vieron, hombres y mujeres dan de huir. Aseguróles el indio que llevaba consigo de los que traía, diciendo que no hubiesen miedo, que gente buena era. Hízolos dar el Almirante cascabeles y sortijas de latón y cuentezuelas de vidrio verdes y amarillas, con que fueron muy contentos, visto que no tenían oro ni otra cosa preciosa y que bastaba dejarlos seguros y que toda la comarca era poblada y huidos los demás de miedo (y certifica el Almirante a los Reyes que diez hombres hagan huir a diez mil: tan cobardes y medrosos son que ni traen armas, salvo unas varas, y en el cabo de ellas un palillo agudo tostado), acordó volverse. Dice que las varas se las quitó todas con buena maña, rescatándoselas de manera que todas las dieron. Tornados adonde habían dejado las barcas, envió ciertos cristianos al lugar por donde subieron, porque le había parecido que había visto un gran colmenar. Antes de que viniesen los que habían enviado, ajuntáronse muchos indios y vinieron a las barcas donde ya se había el Almirante recogido con su gente toda; uno de ellos se adelantó en el río junto con la popa de la barca e hizo una grande plática que el Almirante no entendía, salvo que los otros indios de cuando en cuando alzaban las manos al cielo y daban una grande voz. Pensaba el Almirante que lo aseguraban y que les placía de su venida; pero vio al indio que consigo traía demudarse la cara y amarillo como la cera, y temblaba mucho, diciendo por señas que el Almirante se fuese fuera del río, que los querían matar, y llegóse a un cristiano que tenía una ballesta armada y mostróla a los indios, y entendió el Almirante que los decía que los matarían todos, porque aquella ballesta tiraba lejos y mataba. También tomó una espada y la sacó de la vaina, mostrándola diciendo lo mismo; lo cual oído por ellos dieron todos en huir, quedando todavía temblando el dicho indio de cobardía y poco corazón, y era hombre de buena estatura y recio. No quiso el Almirante salir del río; antes hizo remar en tierra hacia donde ellos estaban, que eran muy muchos, todos tintos de colorado y desnudos como su madre los parió, y alguno de ellos con penachos en la cabeza y otras plumas, todos con sus manojos de azagayas. «Lleguéme a ellos y diles algunos bocados de pan y demandéles las azagayas, y dábales por ellas a unos un cascabelito, a otros una sortijuela de latón, a otros unas cuentezuelas; por manera que todos se apaciguaron y vinieron todos a las barcas y daban cuanto tenían por cualquiera cosa que les daban. Los marineros habían muerto una tortuga y la cáscara estaba en la barca en pedazos, y los grumetes dábanles de ella como la una y los indios les daban un manojo de azagayas. Ellos son gente como los otros que he hallado -dice el Almirante-, y de la misma creencia, y creían que veníamos del cielo; y de lo que tienen luego lo dan por cualquier cosa que les den, sin decir que es poco, y creo que así harían de especiería y de oro si lo tuviesen. Vi una casa hermosa no muy grande y de dos puertas, porque así son todas, y entré en ella y vi una obra maravillosa, como cámaras hechas por una cierta manera que no lo sabría decir, y colgando al cielo de ella caracoles y otras cosas. Yo pensé que era templo y los llamé y dije por señas si hacían en ella oración; dijeron que no, y subió uno de ellos arriba y me daba todo cuanto allí había, y de ello tomé algo.»
Martes, 4 de diciembre
Hízose a la vela con poco viento y salió de aquel puerto que nombró Puerto Santo. A las dos leguas vio un buen río de que ayer habló. Fue de luengo de costa, y corríase toda la tierra, pasado el dicho cabo, Essueste y Oesnoroeste hasta el Cabo Lindo, que está al cabo del Monte al Este cuarta del Sudeste, y hay de uno a otro cinco leguas. Del cabo del Monte a legua y media hay un gran río algo angosto; pareció que tenía buena entrada y era muy hondo. Y de allí a tres cuartos de legua vio otro grandísimo río, y debe venir de muy lejos. En la boca tenía cien pasos y en ella ningún banco, y en la boca ocho brazas y buena entrada: porque lo envió a ver y sondar con la barca, y tiene el agua dulce hasta dentro en la mar, y es de los caudalosos que había hallado, y debe haber grandes poblaciones. Después del Cabo Lindo hay una grande bahía que sería buen paso por Esnordeste y Sudeste y Sur-sudoeste.
Miércoles, 5 de diciembre
Toda esta noche anduvo a la corda sobre el Cabo Lindo, adonde anocheció por ver la tierra que iba al Este; y al salir del sol vio otro cabo al Este a dos leguas y media. Pasado aquél, vio que la costa volvía al Sur y tomaba del Sudoeste, y vio luego un cabo muy hermoso y alto a la dicha derrota, y distaba de ese otro siete leguas. Quisiera ir allá, pero por el deseo que tenía de ir a la isla de Babeque, que le quedaba, según decían los indios que llevaban, al Nordeste, lo dejó. Tampoco pudo ir al Babeque, porque el viento que llevaba era Nordeste. Yendo así, miró al Sudeste y vio tierra y era una isla muy grande, de la cual tenía dice que información de los indios, a que llamaban ellos Bohío, poblada de gente. De esta gente dice que los de Cuba o Juana y de todas estas otras islas tienen gran miedo, porque dice que comían los hombres. Otras cosas le contaban los dichos indios, por señas, muy maravillosas: mas el Almirante no dice que las creía, sino que debían tener más astucia y mejor ingenio los de aquella isla Bohío para los cautivar que ellos, porque eran muy flacos de corazón. Así que porque el tiempo era Nordeste y tomaba del Norte, determinó dejar a Cuba o Juana, que hasta entonces había tenido por tierra firme por su grandeza, porque bien habría andado en un paraje ciento y veinte leguas; y partió al Sudeste cuarta del Este. Puesto que la tierra que él había visto se hacía al Sudeste, daba este resguardo porque siempre el viento rodea el Norte para el Nordeste y de allí al Este y Sudeste. Cargó mucho el viento y llevaba todas sus velas, la mar llana y la corriente que le ayudaba, por manera que hasta la una después de medio día desde la mañana hacía de camino ocho millas por hora, y eran seis horas aún no cumplidas, porque dice que allí eran las noches cerca de quince horas. Después anduvo diez millas por hora; y así andaría hasta poner del sol ochenta y ocho millas, que son veintidós leguas, todo al Sudeste. Y porque se hacía noche, mandó a la carabela Niña que se adelantase para ver con el día el puerto, porque era velera, y llegando a la boca del puerto, que era como la bahía de Cádiz, y porque era ya de noche, envió a su barca que sondease el puerto, la cual llevó lumbre de candela; y antes que el Almirante llegase adonde la carabela estaba barloventeando y esperando que la barca le hiciese señas para entrar en el puerto, apagósele la lumbre a la barca. La carabela, como no vio lumbre, corrió de largo e hizo lumbre al Almirante, y, llegado a ella, contaron lo que había acaecido. Estando en esto, los de la barca hicieron otra lumbre: la carabela fue a ella, y el Almirante no pudo, y estuvo toda aquella noche barloventeando.
Jueves, 6 de diciembre
Cuando amaneció, se halló cuatro leguas del puerto. Púsole nombre Puerto María, y vio un cabo hermoso al Sur cuarta del Sudoeste, al cual puso nombre Cabo de la Estrella, y parecióle que era la postrera tierra de aquella isla hacia el Sur; y estaría el Almirante de él veintiocho millas. Parecíale otra tierra como isla no grande al Este, y estaría de él a cuarenta millas. Quedábale otro cabo muy hermoso y bien hecho, a quien puso nombre Cabo del Elefante, al Este cuarta del Sudeste, y distábale ya cincuenta y cuatro millas. Quedábale otro cabo al Essueste, al que puso nombre del Cabo Cinquin; estaría de él veintiocho millas. Quedábale una gran escisura o abertura o abra a la mar, que le pareció ser río, al Sudeste, y tomaba de la cuarta del Este, habría de él a la abra veinte millas. Parecíale que entre el Cabo del Elefante del de Cinquin había una grandísima entrada, y algunos de los marineros decían que era apartamiento de isla; a aquélla puso por nombre la Isla de la Tortuga. Aquella isla grande parecía altísima tierra, no cerrada con montes, sino rasa como hermosas campiñas, y parece toda labrada o grande parte de ella, y parecían las sementeras como trigo en el mes de mayo en la campiña de Córdoba. Viéronse muchos fuegos aquella noche, y de día muchos humos como atalayas, que parecía estar sobre aviso de alguna gente con quien tuviesen guerra. Toda la costa de esta tierra va al Este. A hora de vísperas entró en el puerto dicho, y púsole nombre Puerto de San Nicolao, porque era el día de San Nicolás, por honra suya, y a la entrada de él se maravilló de su hermosura y bondad. Y aunque tiene mucho alabados los puertos de Cuba, pero sin duda dice él que no es menos éste, antes los sobrepuja y ninguno le es semejante. En boca y entrada tiene legua y media de ancho, y se pone la proa al Sursudeste, puesto que por la grande anchura se puede poner la proa adonde quisieren. Va de esta manera al Sursudeste dos leguas; y a la entrada de él por la parte del Sur se hace como una angla, y de allí se sigue así igual hasta el cabo, adonde está una playa muy hermosa y un campo de árboles de mil maneras y todos cargados de frutas, que creía el Almirante ser de especiería y nueces moscadas, sino que no estaban maduras y no se conocía, y un río en medio de la playa. El fondo de este puerto es maravilloso, que hasta llegar a la tierra en longura de una nao no llegó la sondaresa o plomada al fondo con cuarenta brazas, y hay hasta esta longura el fondo de quince brazas y muy limpio; y así es todo el dicho puerto de cada cabo, hondo dentro una pasada de tierra de quince brazas, y limpio; y de esta manera es toda la costa, muy hondable y limpia, que no parece una sola baja, y al pie de ella, tanto como longura de un remo de barca de tierra, tiene cinco brazas. Y después de la longura de dicho puerto, yendo al Sursudeste (en la cual longura pueden barloventear mil carracas), bojó un brazo del puerto al Nordeste por la tierra dentro de una grande media legua, y siempre en una misma anchura, como que lo hicieran por un cordel; el cual queda de manera que, estando en aquel brazo, que será de anchura de veinticinco pasos, no se puede ver la boca de la entrada grande, de manera que queda puerto cerrado, y el fondo de este brazo es así en el comienzo hasta el fin de once brazas, y todo base o arena limpia, y hasta tierra y poner los bordes en las hierbas tiene ocho brazas. Es todo el puerto muy airoso y desabahado, de árboles raso. Toda esta isla le pareció de más peñas que ninguna otra que haya hallado: los árboles más pequeños, y muchos de ellos de la naturaleza de España, como carrascos y madroños y otros, y lo mismo de las hierbas. Es tierra muy alta, y toda campiña o rasa y de muy buenos aires, y no se ha visto tanto frío como allí, aunque no es de contar por frío, mas díjolo al respecto de las otras tierras. Hacia enfrente de aquel puerto una hermosa vega, y en medio de ella el río susodicho; y en aquella comarca, dice, debe haber grandes poblaciones según se veían las almadías con que navegan tantas y tan grandes de ellas como una fusta de quince bancos. Todos los indios huyeron y huían como veían los navíos. Los que consiguió de las isletas traía, tenían tanta gana de ir a su tierra que pensaba, dice el Almirante, que, después que se partiese de allí, los tenía de llevar a sus casas, y que ya lo tenían por sospechoso porque no llevaba el camino de su casa, por lo cual dice que ni les creía lo que le decían, ni los entendía bien ni ellos a él, y dice que habían el mayor miedo del mundo de la gente de aquella isla. Así que, por querer haber lengua con la gente de aquella isla, le fuera necesario detenerse algunos días en aquel puerto, pero no lo hacia por ver mucha tierra y por dudar que el tiempo le duraría. Esperaba en Nuestro Señor que los indios que traía sabrían su lengua y él la suya, y después tornaría, y hablará con aquella gente, y placerá a Su Majestad, dice él, que hallará algún buen rescate de oro antes que vuelva.
Viernes, 7 de diciembre
Al rendir del cuarto del alba, dio las velas y salió de aquel Puerto de San Nicolás y navegó con el viento Sudoeste al Nordeste dos leguas, hasta un cabo que hace el Cheranero, y quedábale al Sudeste un angla y el Cabo de la Estrella al Sudoeste, y distaba del Almirante veinte y cuatro millas. De allí navegó al Este, luengo de costa hasta el cabo Cinquin, que sería cuarenta y ocho millas; verdad es que las veinte fueron al Este cuarta del Nordeste, y aquella costa es tierra toda muy alta y muy grande fondo; hasta dar en tierra es de veinte y treinta brazas, y fuera tanto como un tiro de lombarda no se halla fondo, lo cual todo lo probó el Almirante aquel día por la costa, mucho a su placer con el viento Sudoeste. El angla que arriba dijo llega dice que al Puerto de San Nicolás tanto como tiro de una lombarda, que si aquel espacio se atajase y cortase quedaría hecho isla, lo demás bojaría en el cerco tres o cuatro millas. Toda aquella tierra era muy alta y no de árboles grandes sino como carrascos y madroños, propia, dice, que tierra de Castilla. Antes que llegase al dicho cabo de Cinquin con dos leguas, halló una anglezuela como la abertura de una montaña, por la cual descubrió un valle grandísimo, y violo todo sembrado como cebadas, y sintió que debía de haber en aquel valle grandes poblaciones, y a las espaldas de él había grandes montañas y muy altas. Y cuando llegó al Cabo de Cinquin, le demoraba el Cabo de la Tortuga al Nordeste, y habría treinta y dos millas, y sobre este Cabo Cinquin, a tiro de una lombarda, está una peña en la mar que sale en alto que se puede ver bien; y, estando el Almirante sobre dicho cabo, le demoraba el Cabo del Elefante al Este cuarta del Sudeste, y habría hasta él setenta millas, y toda tierra muy alta. Y a cabo de seis leguas halló una grande angla, y vio por la tierra dentro muy grandes valles y campiñas y montañas altísimas, todo a semejanza de Castilla. Y dende a ocho millas halló un río muy hondo, sino que era angosto, aunque bien pudiera entrar en él una carraca, y la boca todavía sin banco ni bajas. Y dende a dieciséis millas halló un puerto muy ancho y muy hondo, hasta no hallar fondo en la entrada ni a las bordas a tres pasos, salvo quince brazas, y va dentro un cuarto de legua. Y puesto que fuese aún muy temprano, como la una después de mediodía, y el viento era a popa y recio, pero porque el cielo mostraba querer llover mucho y había gran cerrazón, que es peligrosa aun para la tierra que se sabe, cuanto más en la que no se sabe, acordó entrar en el puerto, al cual llamó Puerto de la Concepción, y salió a tierra en un río no muy grande que está al cabo del puerto, que viene por unas vegas y campiñas que era una maravilla ver su hermosura. Llevó redes para pescar, y antes que llegase a tierra saltó una lisa como las de España propia en la barca, que hasta entonces no había visto peces que pareciesen a los de Castilla. Los marineros pescaron y mataron otras, y lenguados y otros peces como los de Castilla. Anduvo un poco por aquella tierra que es toda labrada, y oyó cantar el ruiseñor y otros pajaritos como los de Castilla. Vieron cinco hombres, mas no les quisieron aguardar sino huir. Halló arrayán y otros árboles y hierbas como los de Castilla, y así es la tierra y las montañas.
Sábado, 8 de diciembre
Allí en aquel puerto les llovió mucho con viento Norte muy recio: el puerto es seguro de todos los vientos excepto Norte, puesto que no le puede hacer daño alguno, porque la resaca es grande, que no da lugar a que la nao vire sobre las amarras ni el agua del río. Después de medianoche se tomó el viento al Nordeste y después al Este, de los cuales vientos es aquel puerto bien abrigado por la isla de la Tortuga, que está frontera treinta y seis millas.
Domingo, 9 de diciembre
Este día llovió e hizo tiempo de invierno como en Castilla por octubre. No había visto población sino una casa muy hermosa en el Puerto de San Nicolás, y mejor hecha que en otras partes de las que había visto. La isla es muy grande, y dice el Almirante que no será mucho que boje doscientas leguas: ha visto que es toda muy labrada; creía que debían ser las poblaciones lejos de la mar de donde ven cuando llegaba, y así huían todos y llevaban consigo todo lo que tenían y hacían ahumadas como gente de guerra. Este puerto tiene en la boca mil pasos, que es un cuarto de legua: en ella ni hay banco ni baja, antes no se halla casi fondo hasta en tierra a la orilla de la mar, y hacia dentro, en luengo, va tres mil pasos todo limpio y basa, que cualquiera nao puede surgir en él sin miedo y entrar sin resguardo. Al cabo de él tiene dos bocas de ríos que traen poca agua; enfrente de él hay unas vegas las más hermosas del mundo y casi semejables a las tierras de Castilla, antes éstas tienen ventaja, por lo cual puso nombre a la dicha isla la Isla Española.
Lunes, 10 de diciembre
Ventó mucho el Nordeste, e hízole garrar las anclas medio cable, de que se maravilló el Almirante, y echólo a que las anclas estaban mucho a tierra y venía sobre ella el viento. Y visto que era contrario para ir donde pretendía, envió seis hombres bien aderezados de armas a tierra, que fuesen dos o tres leguas dentro en la tierra para ver si pudieran haber lengua. Fueron y volvieron no habiendo hallado gente ni casas: hallaron empero unas cabañas y caminos muy anchos y lugares donde habían hecho lumbre muchos; vieron las mejores tierras del mundo y hallaron árboles de almáciga muchos, y trajeron de ella y dijeron que había mucha, salvo que no es ahora el tiempo para cogerla, porque no cuaja.
Martes, 11 de diciembre
No partió por el viento, que todavía era Este y Nordeste. Frontero de aquel puerto, como está dicho, está la isla de la Tortuga, y parece grande isla, y va la costa de ella casi como la Española, y puede haber de la una a la otra, a lo más, diez leguas; conviene a saber, desde el Cabo de Cinquin a la cabeza de la Tortuga; después la costa de ella se corre al Sur. Dice que quería ver el entremedio de estas dos islas por ver la isla Española, que es la más hermosa cosa del mundo, y porque, según le decían los indios que traía, por allí se había de ir a la isla de Babeque, los cuales le decían que era isla muy grande y de muy grandes montañas y ríos y valles, y decían que la isla de Bohío era mayor que la Juana a que llaman Cuba, y que no está cercada de agua, y parece dar a entender ser tierra firme, que es aquí detrás de esta Española, a que ellos llaman Caritaba, y que es cosa infinita, y casi traen razón que ellos sean trabajados de gente astuta, porque todas estas islas viven con gran miedo de los de Caniba, «y así torno a decir como otras veces dije -dice él- que Caniba no es otra cosa sino la gente del Gran Can, que debe ser aquí muy vecino, y tendrá navíos y vendrán a cautivarlos, y como no vuelven creen que se los han comido. Cada día entendemos más a estos indios y ellos a nosotros, puesto que muchas veces hayan entendido uno por otro», dice el Almirante. Envió gente a tierra, hallaron mucha almáciga sin cuajarse; dice que las aguas lo deben hacer, y que en Xío lo cogen por marzo, y que en enero la cogerían en aquestas tierras por ser tan templadas. Pescaron muchos pescados como los de Castilla, albures, salmones, pijotas, gallos, pámpanos, lisas, corvinas, camarones, y vieron sardinas; hallaron mucho liñáloe.
Miércoles, 12 de diciembre
No partió aqueste día, por la misma causa del viento contrario dicha. Puso una gran cruz a la entrada del puerto de la parte del Oeste, en un alto muy vistoso, «en señal -dice él- que Vuestras Altezas tienen la tierra por suya, y principalmente por señal de Jesucristo Nuestro Señor y honra de la Cristiandad»; la cual puesta, tres marineros metiéronse por el bosque a ver los árboles y hierbas, y oyeron un gran golpe de gente, todos desnudos como los de atrás, a los cuales llamaron y fueron tras ellos, pero dieron los indios a huir, y, finalmente tomaron una mujer, que no pudieron más, «porque yo -dice él- les había mandado que tomasen algunos para honrarlos y hacerles perder el miedo y si hubiesen alguna cosa de provecho, como no parece poder ser otra cosa según la hermosura de la tierra; y así trajeron una mujer muy moza y hermosa a la nao, y habló con aquellos indios, porque todos tenían una lengua». Hízola el Almirante vestir y diole cuentas de vidrio y cascabeles y sortija de latón y tornóla a enviar a tierra muy honradamente, según su costumbre; envió algunas personas de la nao con ella, y tres de los indios que llevaba consigo, porque hablasen con aquella gente. Los marineros que iban en la barca, cuando la llevaban a tierra, dijeron al Almirante que ya no quisiera salir de la nao, sino quedarse con las otras mujeres indias que había hecho tomar en el puerto de Mares de la isla Juana de Cuba. Todos estos indios que venían con aquella india dice que venían en una canoa, que es su carabela en que navegan, de alguna parte, y cuando asomaron a la entrada del puerto y vieron los navíos, volviéronse atrás y dejaron la canoa por allí en algún lugar y fuéronse camino de su población. Ella mostraba el paraje de la población. Traía esta mujer un pedacito de oro en la nariz, que era señal que había en aquella isla oro.
Jueves, 13 de diciembre
Volvieron los tres hombres que había enviado el Almirante con la mujer a tres horas de la noche, y no fueron con ella hasta la población, porque les pareció lejos o porque tuvieron miedo. Dijeron que otro día vendría mucha gente a los navíos, porque ya debían de estar asegurados por las nuevas que daría la mujer. El Almirante, con deseo de saber si había alguna cosa de provecho en aquella tierra, y por haber alguna lengua con aquella gente por ser la tierra tan hermosa y fértil, y tomasen gana de servir a los Reyes, determinó de tornar a enviar a la población, confiando en las nuevas que la india habría dado de los cristianos ser buena gente, para lo cual escogió nueve hombres bien aderezados de armas y aptos para semejante negocio, con los cuales fue un indio de los que traía. Estos fueron a la población que estaba cuatro leguas y media al Sudeste, la cual hallaron en un grandísimo valle y vacía, porque, como sintieron ir los cristianos, todos huyeron, dejando cuanto tenían, la tierra dentro. La población era de mil casas y de más de mil hombres. El indio que llevaban los cristianos corrió tras ellos dando voces, diciendo que no hubiesen miedo, que los cristianos no eran de Cariba, mas antes eran del cielo, y que daban muchas cosas hermosas a todos los que hallaban. Tanto les impresionó lo que decía, que se aseguraron y vinieron juntos de ellos más de dos mil, y todos venían a señal de gran reverencia y amistad, los cuales estaban todos temblando hasta que mucho los aseguraron. Dijeron los cristianos que, después que ya estaban sin temor, iban todos a sus casas, y cada uno les traía de lo que tenía de comer, que es pan de niames, que son unas raíces como rábanos grandes que nacen, que siembran y nacen y plantan en todas sus tierras, y es su vida, y hacen de ellas pan y cuecen y asan y tienen sabor propio de castañas, y no hay quien no crea comiéndolas que no sean castañas. Dábanles pan y pescado y de lo que tenían. Y porque los indios que traía en el navío tenían entendido que el Almirante deseaba tener algún papagayo, parece que aquel indio que iba con los cristianos díjoles algo de esto, y así les trajeron papagayos y les daban cuanto les pedían sin querer nada por ello. Rogábanles que no se viniesen aquella noche y que les darían otras muchas cosas que tenían en la sierra. Al tiempo que toda aquella gente estaba junto con los cristianos, vieron venir una gran batalla o multitud de gente con el marido de la mujer que había el Almirante honrado y enviado, la cual traían caballera sobre sus hombros, y venían a dar gracias a los cristianos por la honra que el Almirante le había hecho y dádivas que le había dado. Dijeron los cristianos al Almirante que era toda gente más hermosa y de mejor condición que ninguna otra de las que habían hasta allí hallado; pero dice el Almirante que no sabe cómo puedan ser de mejor condición que las otras, dando a entender que todas las que habían en las otras islas hallado era de muy buena condición. Cuanto a la hermosura, dicen los cristianos que no había comparación, así en los hombres como en las mujeres, y que son blancos más que los otros, y que entre los otros vieron dos mujeres mozas tan blancas como podían ser en España. Dijeron también de la hermosura de las tierras que vieron, que ninguna comparación tienen las de Castilla las mejores en hermosura y en bondad, y el Almirante así lo veía por las que ha visto y por las que tenía presentes, y decíanle que las que veía ninguna comparación tenían con aquellas de aquel valle, ni la campiña de Córdoba llegaba a aquélla con tanta diferencia como tiene el día de la noche. Decían que todas aquellas tierras estaban labradas y que por medio de aquel valle pasaba un río muy ancho y grande que podía regar todas las tierras. Estaban todos los árboles verdes y llenos de fruta y las hierbas todas floridas y muy altas; los caminos muy anchos y buenos, los aires eran como en abril en Castilla, cantaba el ruiseñor y otros pajaritos como en el dicho mes en España, que dicen que era la mayor dulzura del mundo. Las noches cantaban algunos pajaritos suavemente; los grillos y ranas se oían muchas; los pescados como en España. Vieron muchos almácigos y liñáloe y algodonales; oro no hallaron, y no es maravilla que en tan poco tiempo no se halle. Tomó aquí el Almirante experiencia de qué horas era el día y la noche, y de sol a sol halló que pasaron veinte ampolletas, que son de a media hora, aunque dice que allí puede haber defecto, o porque no la vuelven presto o deja de pasar algo. Dice también que halló por el cuadrante que estaba de la línea equinoccial treinta y cuatro grados.
Viernes, 14 de diciembre
Salió de aquel Puerto de la Concepción con terral, y luego desde a poco calmó, y así lo experimentó cada día de los que por allí estuvo. Después vino viento Levante; navegó con él al Nornordeste, llegó a la isla de la Tortuga, vio una punta de ella que llamó la Punta Pierna, que estaba al Esnordeste de la cabeza de la isla, y habría doce millas; y de allí descubrió otra punta que llamó la Punta Lanzada, en la misma derrota del Nordeste, que habría dieciséis millas. Y así, desde la cabeza de la Tortuga hasta la Punta Aguda habría cuarenta y cuatro millas, que son once leguas al Esnordeste. En aquel camino había algunos pedazos de playa grandes. Esta isla de la Tortuga es tierra muy alta, pero no montañosa, y es muy hermosa y muy poblada de gente como la de la isla Española, y la tierra así toda labrada, que parecía ver la campiña de Córdoba. Visto que el viento le era contrario y no podía ir a la isla Baneque, acordó tornarse al Puerto de la Concepción, de donde había salido, y no pudo cobrar un río que está de la parte del Este del dicho puerto dos leguas.
Sábado, 15 de diciembre
Salió del puerto de la Concepción otra vez para su camino, pero, en saliendo del puerto, ventó Este recio su contrario, y tomó la vuelta de la Tortuga hasta ella, y de allí dio vuelta para ver aquel río que ayer quisiera ver y tomar y no pudo, y de esta vuelta tampoco lo pudo tomar, aunque surgió media legua de sotaviento en una playa, buen surgidero y limpio. Amarrados sus navíos, fue con las barcas a ver el río, y entró por un brazo de mar que está antes de media legua, y no era la boca. Volvió, y halló la boca que no tenía aún una braza, y venía muy recio; entró con las barcas por él, para llegar a las poblaciones que los que anteayer había enviado habían visto, y mandó echar la sirga en tierra, y, tirando los marineros de ella, subieron las barcas dos tiros de lombarda, y no pudo andar más por la reciura de la corriente del río. Vio algunas cosas y el valle grande donde están las poblaciones, y dijo que otra cosa más hermosa no había visto, por medio del cual valle viene aquel río. Vio también gente a la entrada del río, mas todos dieron a huir. Dice más, que aquella gente debe ser muy cazada, pues vive con tanto temor, porque en llegando que llegan a cualquier parte, luego hacen ahumadas de las atalayas por toda la tierra, y esto más en esta isla Española y en la Tortuga, que también es grande isla, que en las otras que atrás dejaba. Puso nombre al valle Valle del Paraíso, y al río Guadalquivir, porque dice que así viene tan grande como el Guadalquivir por Córdoba, y a las veras o riberas de él, playa de piedras muy hermosas, y todo andable.
Domingo, 16 de diciembre
A la media noche, con el ventezuelo de tierra, dio las velas por salir de aquel golfo, y viniendo del bordo de la isla Española yendo a la bolina, porque luego a hora de tercia ventó Este, a medio golfo halló una canoa con un indio solo en ella, de que se maravillaba el Almirante cómo se podía tener sobre el agua siendo el viento grande. Hízole meter en la nao a él y su canoa, y halagado, diole cuentas de vidrio, cascabeles y sortijas de latón y llevólo en la nao hasta tierra a una población que estaba de allí dieciséis millas junto a la mar, donde surgió el Almirante y halló buen surgidero en la playa junto a la población, que parecía ser de nuevo hecha, porque todas las casas eran nuevas. El indio fuese luego con su canoa a tierra, y da nuevas del Almirante y de los cristianos ser buena gente, puesto que ya las tenían por lo pasado de las otras donde habían ido los seis cristianos; y luego vinieron más de quinientos hombres, y desde a poco vino el rey de ellos, todos en la playa junto a los navíos, porque estaban surgidos muy cerca de tierra. Luego uno a uno, y muchos a muchos, venían a la nao sin traer consigo cosa alguna, puesto que algunos traían algunos granos de oro finísimo en las orejas y en la nariz, el cual luego daban de buena gana. Mandó hacer honra a todos el Almirante, y dice él «porque son la mejor gente del mundo y más mansa; y sobre todo, que tengo mucha esperanza en Nuestro Señor que Vuestras Altezas los harán todos cristianos, y serán todos suyos, que por suyos los tengo». Vio también que el dicho rey estaba en la playa, y que todos le hacían acatamiento. Envióle un presente el Almirante, el cual dice que recibió con mucho estado, y que sería mozo de hasta veintiún años, y que tenía un ayo viejo y otros consejeros que le aconsejaban y respondían, y que él hablaba muy pocas palabras. Uno de los indios que traía el Almirante habló con él, y le dijo cómo venían los cristianos del cielo, y que andaba en busca de oro y quería ir a la isla de Baneque; y él respondió que bien era, y que en la dicha isla había mucho oro; el cual mostró, al alguacil del Almirante que le llevó el presente, el camino que habían de llevar, y que en dos días iría de allí a ella, y que si de su tierra había menester algo lo daría de muy buena voluntad. Este rey y todos los otros andaban desnudos como sus madres los parieron, y así las mujeres, sin algún empacho, y son los más hermosos hombres y mujeres que hasta allí hubieron hallado: harto blancos, que si vestidos anduviesen y guardasen del sol y del aire, serían casi tan blancos como en España, porque esta tierra es harto fría y la mejor que lengua puede decir. Es muy alta, y sobre el mayor monte podrían arar bueyes, y hecha toda a campiñas y valles. En toda Castilla no hay tierra que se pueda comparar a ella en hermosura y bondad. Toda esta isla y la de la Tortuga son todas labradas como la campiña de Córdoba. Tienen sembrado en ellas ajes, que son unos ramillos que planta, y al pie de ellos nacen unas raíces como zanahorias, que sirven por pan, y rallan y amasan y hacen pan con ellas, y después tornan a plantar el mismo ramillo en otra parte y torna a dar cuatro o cinco de aquellas raíces que son muy sabrosas, propio gusto de castaña. Allí las hay más gordas y buenas que había visto en ninguna parte, porque también dice que de aquéllas había en Guinea. Las de aquel lugar eran tan gordas como la pierna, y aquella gente todos dicen que eran gordos y valientes y no flacos, como los otros que antes había hallado, y de muy dulce conversación, sin secta. Y los árboles de allí dice que eran tan viciosos que las hojas dejaban de ser verdes y eran prietas de verdura. Era cosa de maravilla ver aquellos valles y los ríos y buenas aguas, y las tierras para pan, para ganados de toda suerte, de que ellos no tienen alguna, para huertas y para todas las cosas del mundo que el hombre sepa pedir. Después a la tarde vino el rey a la nao. El Almirante le hizo la honra que debía y le hizo decir cómo era de los Reyes de Castilla, los cuales eran los mayores Príncipes del mundo. Mas ni los indios que el Almirante traía, que eran los intérpretes, creían nada, ni el rey tampoco, sino creían que venían del cielo y que los reinos de los reyes de Castilla eran en el cielo y no en este mundo. Pusiéronle de comer al rey de las cosas de Castilla y él comía un bocado y después dábalo todo a sus consejeros y al ayo y a los demás que metió consigo. «Crean Vuestras Altezas que estas tierras son en tanta cantidad y buenas y fértiles y en especial éstas de esta isla Española, que no hay persona que lo sepa decir, y nadie lo puede creer si no lo viese. Y crean que esta isla y todas las otras son así suyas como Castilla, que aquí no falta salvo asiento y mandarles hacer lo que quisieren, porque yo con esta gente que traigo, que no son muchos, correría todas estas islas sin afrenta, que ya he visto sólo tres de estos marineros descender en tierra y haber multitud de estos indios y todos huir, sin que les quisiesen hacer mal. Ellos no tienen armas, y son todos desnudos y de ningún ingenio en las armas y muy cobardes, que mil no aguardarían tres, y así son buenos para les mandar y les hacer trabajar, sembrar y hacer todo lo otro que fuere menester, y que hagan villas y se enseñen a andar vestidos y a nuestras costumbres.»
Lunes, 17 de diciembre
Ventó aquella noche reciamente viento Esnordeste; no se alteró mucho la mar porque lo estorba y escuda la isla de la Tortuga que está frontero y hace abrigo. Así estuvo allí aqueste día. Envió a pescar los marineros con redes; holgáronse mucho con los cristianos los indios y trajéronles ciertas flechas de los Caniba o de los Caníbales, y son de las espigas de cañas, e injértanles unos palillos tostados y agudos, y son muy largos. Mostráronles dos hombres que les faltaban algunos pedazos de carne de su cuerpo e hiciéronles entender que los caníbales los habían comido a bocados; el Almirante no lo creyó. Tomó a enviar ciertos cristianos a la población, y a trueque de cuentezuelas de vidrio rescataron algunos pedazos de oro labrado en hoja delgada. Vieron a uno que tuvo el Almirante por gobernador de aquella provincia, que llamaban cacique, un pedazo tan grande como la mano de aquella hoja de oro, y parecía que lo quería rescatar; el cual se fue a su casa y los otros quedaron en la plaza. Y él hacía hacer pedazuelos de aquella pieza, y trayendo cada vez un pedazuelo rescatábalo. Después de que no hubo más, dijo por señas que él había enviado a por más y que otro día lo traerían. «Estas cosas todas y la manera de ellos y sus costumbres y mansedumbre y consejo, muestra de ser gente más despierta y entendida que otros que hasta allí hubiese hallado», dice el Almirante. En la tarde vino allí una canoa de la isla de la Tortuga con bien cuarenta hombres, y, llegando a la playa, toda la gente del pueblo que estaba junta se asentaron todos en señal de paz, y algunos de la canoa y casi todos descendieron en tierra. El cacique se levantó solo, y con palabras que parecían de amenaza los hizo volver a la canoa y les echaba agua, y tomaba piedras de la playa y las echaba en el agua; y después que ya todos con mucha obediencia se pusieron y embarcaron en la canoa, él tomó una piedra y la puso en la mano a mi alguacil para que la tirase, al cual yo había enviado a tierra y al escribano y a otros para ver si traían algo que aprovechase, y el alguacil no les quiso tirar. Allí mostró mucho aquel cacique que se favorecía con el Almirante. La canoa se fue luego, y dijeron al Almirante, después de ida, que en la Tortuga había más oro que en la isla Española, porque es más cerca de Baneque. Dijo el Almirante que no creía que en aquella isla Española ni en la Tortuga hubiese minas de oro, sino que lo traían de Baneque, y que traen poco, porque no tienen aquéllos qué dar por ello, y aquella tierra es tan gruesa que no ha menester que trabajen mucho para sustentarse ni para vestirse, como anden desnudos. Y creía el Almirante que estaba muy cerca de la fuente, y que Nuestro Señor le había de mostrar dónde nace el oro. Tenía nueva que de allí al Baneque había cuatro jornadas, que podrían ser treinta o cuarenta leguas, que en un día de buen tiempo se podía andar.
Martes, 18 de diciembre
Estuvo en aquella playa surto este día porque no había viento y también porque había dicho el cacique que habría de traer oro, no porque tuviese en mucho al Almirante el oro, dice, que podía traer, pues allí no había minas, sino por saber mejor de dónde lo traían. Luego en amaneciendo mandó ataviar la nao y la carabela de armas y banderas por la fiesta que era este día de Santa María de la O, o conmemoración de la Anunciación. Tiráronse muchos tiros de lombardas, y el rey de aquella isla Española, dice el Almirante, había madrugado de su casa, que debía distar cinco leguas de allí, según pudo juzgar, y llegó a la hora de tercia a aquella población donde ya estaban algunos de la nao que el Almirante había enviado para ver si venia oro; los cuales dijeron que venían con el rey más de doscientos hombres y que lo traían en unas andas cuatro hombres, y era mozo como arriba se dijo. Hoy, estando el Almirante comiendo debajo del castillo, llegó a la nao con toda su gente. Y dice el Almirante a los Reyes: «Sin duda pareciera bien a Vuestras Altezas su estado y acatamiento que todos le tienen, puesto que todos andan desnudos. El, así como entró en la nao, halló que estaba comiendo a la mesa debajo del castillo de popa, y él, a buen andar, se vino a sentar a par de mí y no me quiso dar lugar que yo me saliese a él ni me levantase de la mesa, salvo que yo comiese. Yo pensé que él tendría a bien comer de nuestras viandas; mandé luego traerle cosas que él comiese. Y, cuando entró debajo del castillo, hizo señas con la mano que todos los suyos quedasen fuera, y así lo hicieron con la mayor prisa y acatamiento del mundo, y se asentaron todos en la cubierta, salvo dos hombres de una edad madura, que yo estimé por sus consejeros y ayo, que vinieron y se asentaron a sus pies, y de las viandas que yo le puse delante tomaba de cada una tanto como se toma para hacer la salva, y después luego lo demás enviábalo a los suyos, y todos comían de ella; y así hizo en el beber, que solamente llegaba a la boca y después así lo daba a los otros, y todo con un estado maravilloso y muy pocas palabras, y aquellas que él decía, según yo podía entender, eran muy asentadas y de seso, y aquellos dos le miraban a la boca y hablaban por él y con él y con mucho acatamiento. Después de comido, un escudero traía un cinto, que es propio como los de Castilla en la hechura, salvo que es de otra obra, que él tomó y me lo dio, y dos pedazos de oro labrado que eran muy delgados, que creo que aquí alcanzan poco de él, puesto que tengo que están muy vecinos de donde nace y hay mucho. Yo vi que le agradaba un arambel que yo tenía sobre mi cama; yo se lo di y unas cuentas muy buenas de ámbar que yo traía al pescuezo y unos zapatos colorados y una almatraja de agua de azahar, de que quedó tan contento que fue maravilla; y él y su ayo y consejeros llevan grande pesar porque no me entendían ni yo a ellos. Con todo, le conocí que me dijo que si me cumpliese algo de aquí, que toda la isla estaba a mi mandar. Yo envié por unas cuentas mías adonde por un señal tengo un excelente de oro en que están esculpidos Vuestras Altezas y se lo mostré y le dije otra vez como ayer que Vuestras Altezas mandaban y señoreaban todo lo mejor del mundo, y que no había tan grandes príncipes; y le mostré las banderas reales y las otras de la Cruz, de que él tuvo en mucho; y qué grandes señores serían Vuestras Altezas, decía él contra sus consejeros, pues de tan lejos y del cielo me habían enviado hasta aquí sin miedo. Y otras cosas muchas se pasaron que yo no entendía, salvo que bien veía que todo tenía a grande maravilla.» Después que ya fue tarde y él se quiso ir, el Almirante le envió en la barca muy honradamente e hizo tirar muchas lombardas, y, puesto en tierra, subió en sus andas y se fue con sus más de doscientos hombres; y a su hijo le llevaban atrás en los hombros de un indio, hombre muy honrado. A todos los marineros y gente de los navíos donde quiera que los topaba les mandaba dar de comer y hacer mucha honra. Dijo un marinero que le había topado en el camino y visto, que todas las cosas que le había dado el Almirante y cada una de ellas llevaba delante del rey un hombre, a lo que parecía de los más honrados. Iba su hijo atrás del rey buen rato, con tanta compañía de gente como él, y otro tanto un hermano del mismo rey, salvo que iba el hermano a pie y llevábanlo del brazo dos hombres honrados. Este vino a la nao después del rey, el cual dio al Almirante algunas cosas de los dichos rescates, y allí supo el Almirante que al rey llamaban en su lengua cacique. En este día se rescató dice que poco oro; pero supo el Almirante, de un hombre viejo, que había muchas islas comarcanas a cien leguas y más, según pudo entender, en las cuales nace mucho oro, hasta decirle que había isla que era todo oro, y en las otras que hay tanta cantidad que lo cogen y ciernen como con cedazos y lo funden y hacen vergas y mil labores: figuraba por señas la hechura. Este viejo señaló al Almirante la derrota y el paraje donde estaba; determinóse el Almirante de ir allá, y dijo que, si no fuera el dicho viejo tan principal persona de aquel rey, que lo detuviera y llevara consigo, o si supiera la lengua que se lo rogara, y creía, según estaba bien con él y con los cristianos, que se fuera con él de buena gana. Pero, porque tenía ya aquellas gentes por de los Reyes de Castilla y no era razón de hacerles agravio, acordó de dejarlo. Puso una cruz muy poderosa en medio de la plaza de aquella población, a lo cual ayudaron los indios mucho, e hicieron dice que oración y la adoraron, y, por la muestra que dan, espera en Nuestro Señor el Almirante que todas aquellas islas han de ser cristianas.
Miércoles, 19 de diciembre
Esta noche se hizo a la vela por salir de aquel golfo que hace allí la isla de la Tortuga con la Española, y siendo de día tomó el viento Levante, con el cual todo este día no pudo salir de entre aquellas dos islas, y a la noche no pudo tomar un puerto que por allí parecía. Vio por allí cuatro cabos de tierra y una grande bahía y río, y de allí vio una angla muy grande y tenía una población, y a las espaldas un valle entre muchas montañas altísimas, llenas de árboles, que juzgó ser pinos, y sobre los Dos Hermanos hay una montaña muy alta y gorda que va de Norte al Sudoeste, y del Cabo de Torres al Essueste está una isla pequeña, a la cual puso nombre Santo Tomás, porque es mañana su vigilia. Todo el cerco de aquella isla tiene cabos y puertos maravillosos, según juzgaba él desde la mar. Antes de la isla, de la parte del Oeste, hay un cabo que entra mucho en la mar alto y bajo, y por eso le puso nombre Cabo Alto y Bajo. Del camino de Torres al Este cuarta del Sudeste hay sesenta millas hasta una montaña más alta que otra, que entra en la mar, y parece desde lejos isla por sí, por un degollado que tiene de la parte de tierra; púsole nombre Monte Caribata porque aquella provincia se llamaba Caribata. Es muy hermoso y lleno de árboles verdes y claros, sin nieve y sin niebla, y era entonces por allí el tiempo, cuanto a los aires y templanza, como por marzo en Castilla, y en cuanto a los árboles y hierbas como por mayo; las noches dice que eran de catorce horas.
Jueves, 20 de diciembre
Hoy, al ponerse el sol, entró en un puerto que estaba entre la isla de Santo Tomás y el Cabo de Caribata, y surgió. Este puerto es hermosísimo y cabrían en él cuantas naos hay en cristianos: la entrada de él parece desde la mar imposible a los que no hubiesen en él entrado, por unas restingas de peñas que pasan desde el monte hasta casi la isla, y no puestas por orden, sino unas acá y otras acullá, unas a la mar y otras a la tierra; por lo cual es menester estar despiertos para entrar por unas entradas que tienen muy anchas y buenas para entrar sin temor, y todo muy hondo de siete brazas, y pasadas las restingas dentro hay doce brazas. Puede la nao estar con una cuerda cualquiera amarrada contra cualesquiera vientos que haya. A la entrada de este puerto dice que había un canal, que queda a la parte del Oeste de una isleta de arena, y en ella muchos árboles, y hasta el pie de ella hay siete brazas; pero hay muchas bajas en aquella comarca, y conviene abrir el ojo hasta entrar en el puerto; después no hayan miedo a toda la tormenta del mundo. De aquel puerto se parecía un valle grandísimo y todo labrado, que desciende a él del Sudeste, todo cercado de montañas altísimas que parecen que llegan al cielo, y hermosísimas, llenas de árboles verdes, y sin duda que hay allí montañas más altas que la isla de Tenerife en Canaria, que es tenida por de las más altas que puede hallarse. De esta parte de la isla de Santo Tomás está otra isleta a una legua, y dentro de ella otra, y en todas hay puertos maravillosos; mas cumple mirar por las bajas. Vio también poblaciones y ahumadas que se hacían.
Viernes, 21 de diciembre
Hoy fue con las barcas de los navíos a ver aquel puerto; el cual vio ser tal que afirmó que ninguno se le iguala de cuantos haya jamás visto, y excúsase diciendo que ha loado los pasados tanto que no sabe cómo lo encarecer, y que teme que sea juzgado por manifestar excesivo más de lo que es verdad. A esto satisface diciendo: que él trae consigo marineros antiguos, y éstos dicen y dirán lo mismo, y todos cuantos andan en la mar; conviene a saber, todas las alabanzas que ha dicho de los puertos pasados ser verdad, y ser éste muy mejor que todos ser asimismo verdad. Dice más de esta manera: «Yo he andado veintitrés años en la mar, sin salir de ella tiempo que se haya de contar, y vi todo el Levante y Poniente, que hice por ir al camino de Septentrión, que es Inglaterra, y he andado la Guinea, mas en todas estas partidas no se hallaría la perfección de los puertos... hallado siempre lo... mejor que el otro, que yo con buen tiento miraba mi escribir, y torno a decir que afirmo haber bien escrito, y que ahora éste es sobre todos y cabrían en él todas las naos del mundo, y cerrado, que con una cuerda, la más vieja de la nao, la tuviese amarrada.» Desde la entrada hasta el fondo habrá cinco leguas. Vio unas tierras muy labradas, aunque todas son así, y mandó salir dos hombres fuera de las barcas que fuesen a un alto para que viesen si había población, porque de la mar no se veía ninguna; puesto que aquella noche, cerca de las diez horas, vinieron a la nao en una canoa ciertos indios a ver al Almirante y a los cristianos por maravilla, y les dio de los rescates, con que se holgaron mucho. Los dos cristianos volvieron y dijeron dónde habían visto una población grande, un poco desviada de la mar. Mandó el Almirante remar hacia la parte donde la población estaba hasta llegar cerca de tierra, y vio unos indios que venían a la orilla de la mar, y parecía que venían con temor, por lo cual mandó detener las barcas y que les hablasen los indios que traía en la nao, que no les haría mal alguno. Entonces se allegaron más a la mar, y el Almirante más a tierra; y después que del todo perdieron el miedo, venían tantos que cubrían la tierra, dando mil gracias, así hombres como mujeres y niños; los unos corrían de acá y los otros de allá a nos traer pan que hacen de niames, que ellos llaman ajes, que es muy blanco y bueno, y nos traían agua en calabazas y en cántaros de barro de la hechura de los de Castilla, y nos traían cuanto en el mundo tenían y sabían que el Almirante quería, y todo con un corazón tan largo y tan contento que era maravilla; «y no se diga que porque lo que daban valía poco por eso lo daban liberalmente -dice el Almirante-, porque lo mismo hacían y tan liberalmente los que daban pedazos de oro como los que daban la calabaza de agua; y fácil cosa es de conocer -dice el Almirante- cuándo se da una cosa con muy deseoso corazón de dar». Estas son sus palabras: «Esta gente no tiene varas ni azagayas ni otras ningunas armas, ni los otros de toda esta isla, y tengo que es grandísima: son así desnudos como su madre los parió, así mujeres como hombres, que en las otras tierras de la Juana y las otras de las otras islas traían las mujeres delante de sí unas cosas de algodón con que cobijan su natura, tanto como una bragueta de calzas de hombre, en especial después que pasan de edad de doce años; mas aquí ni moza ni vieja; y en los otros lugares todos los hombres hacían esconder sus mujeres de los cristianos por celos, más allí no, y hay muy lindos cuerpos de mujeres, y ellas las primeras que venían a dar gracias al cielo y traer cuanto tenían, en especial cosas de comer, pan de ajes y gonza avellanada y de cinco o seis maneras frutas», de los cuales mandó curar el Almirante para traer a los Reyes. No menos dice que hacían las mujeres en las otras partes antes que se escondiesen, y el Almirante mandaba en todas partes estar todos los suyos sobre aviso que no enojasen a alguno en cosa ninguna y que nada les tomasen contra su voluntad, y así les pagaban todo lo que de ellos recibían. Finalmente -dice el Almirante- que no puede creer que hombre haya visto gente de tan buenos corazones y francos para dar y tan temerosos, que ellos se deshacían todos por dar a los cristianos cuanto tenían y, en llegando los cristianos, luego corrían a traerlo todo. Después envió el Almirante seis cristianos a la población para que la viesen qué era, a los cuales hicieron cuanta honra podían y sabían y les daban cuanto tenían, porque ninguna duda les queda, sino que creían que el Almirante y toda su gente habían venido del cielo: lo mismo creían los indios que consigo el Almirante traía de las otras islas, puesto que ya se les había dicho lo que debían de tener. Después de haber ido los seis cristianos, vinieron ciertas canoas con gente a rogar al Almirante, de parte de un señor, que fuese a su pueblo cuando de allí se partiese. (Canoa es una barca en que navegan, y son de ellas grandes y de ellas pequeñas). Y visto que el pueblo de aquel señor estaba en el camino sobre una punta de tierra, esperando con mucha gente al Almirante, fue allá, y antes que se partiese vino a la playa tanta gente que era espanto, hombres y mujeres y niños, dando voces que no se fuese sino que se quedase con ellos. Los mensajeros del otro señor que había venido a convidar estaban aguardando con sus canoas, porque no se fuese sin ir a ver al señor, y así lo hizo, y, en llegando que llegó el Almirante adonde aquel señor le estaba esperando, y tenían muchas cosas de comer, mandó asentar toda su gente; manda que lleven lo que tenía de comer a las barcas donde estaba el Almirante, junto a la orilla de la mar. Y como vio que el Almirante había recibido lo que le habían llevado, todos o los más de los indios dieron a correr al pueblo, que debía estar cerca, para traerle más comida y papagayos y otras cosas de lo que tenían, con tan franco corazón que era maravilla. El Almirante les dio cuentas de vidrio y sortijas de latón y cascabeles, no porque ellos demandasen algo, sino porque le parecía que era razón, y sobre todo -dice el Almirante- porque los tiene ya por cristianos y por de los Reyes de Castilla más que las gentes de Castilla; y dice que otra cosa no falta, salvo saber la lengua y mandarles, porque todo lo que se les mandare harán sin contradicción alguna. Partióse de allí el Almirante para los navíos, y los indios daban voces, así hombres como mujeres y niños, que no se fuesen y se quedasen con ellos los cristianos. Después que se partían venían tras ellos a la nao canoas llenas de ellos, a los cuales hizo hacer mucha honra y darles de comer y otras cosas que llevaron. Había también venido antes otro señor de la parte del Oeste, y aun a nado venían muy mucha gente, y estaba la nao más de grande media legua de tierra. El señor que dije se había tornado; envióle ciertas personas para que le viesen y le preguntasen de estas islas; y los recibió muy bien, y los llevó consigo a su pueblo para darles ciertos pedazos grandes de oro, y llegaron a un gran río, el cual los indios pasaron a nado: los cristianos no pudieron y así se tornaron. En toda esta comarca hay montañas altísimas que parecen llegar al cielo, que la de la isla de Tenerife parece nada en comparación de ellas en altura y en hermosura, y todas son verdes, llenas de arboledas que es una cosa de maravilla. Entre medio de ellas hay vegas muy graciosas, y al pie de este puerto al Sur hay una vega tan grande que los ojos no pueden llegar con la vista al cabo, sin que tenga impedimento de montaña, que parece que debe tener quince o veinte leguas, por la cual viene un río, y es toda poblada y labrada y está tan verde ahora como si fuera en Castilla por mayo o por junio, puesto que las noches tienen catorce horas y sea la tierra tanto septentrional. Así, este puerto es muy bueno para todos los vientos que puedan ventar, cerrado y hondo y todo poblado de gente muy buena y mansa y sin armas buenas ni malas, y puede cualquier navío estar sin miedo en él que otros navíos que vengan de noche a le saltear, porque, puesto que la boca sea bien ancha de más de dos leguas, es muy cerrada de dos restingas de piedra que escasamente la ven sobre agua, salvo una entrada muy angosta en esta restinga, que no parece sino que fue hecho a mano y que dejaron una puerta abierta cuanto los navíos puedan entrar. En la boca hay siete brazas de fondo hasta el pie de una isleta llana que tiene una playa y árboles; al pie de ella de la parte del Oeste tiene la entrada, y se puede llegar una nao sin miedo hasta poner el borde junto a la peña. Hay de la parte del Noroeste tres islas y un gran río a una legua del cabo de este puerto; es el mejor del mundo; púsole nombre el Puerto de la Mar de Santo Tomás, porque era hoy su día: díjole mar por su grandeza.
Sábado, 22 de diciembre
En amaneciendo, dio las velas para ir su camino a buscar las islas que los indios le decían que tenían mucho oro, y de algunas que tenían más oro que tierra; no le hizo tiempo y hubo de tornar a surgir, y envió la barca a pescar con la red. El señor de aquella tierra, que tenía un lugar cerca de allí, le envió una grande canoa llena de gente, y en ella un principal criado suyo a rogar al Almirante que fuese con los navíos a su tierra y que le daría cuanto tuviese. Envióle con aquél un cinto que, en lugar de bolsa, traía una carátula que tenía dos orejas grandes de oro de martillo, y la lengua y la nariz. «Y como sea esta gente de muy buen corazón, que cuanto le piden dan con la mejor voluntad del mundo, les parece que pidiéndoles algo les hacen grande merced»: esto dice el Almirante. Toparon la barca y dieron el cinto a un grumete, y vinieron con su canoa a bordo de la nao con su embajada. Primero que los entendiesen, pasó alguna parte del día; ni los indios que él traía los entendían bien, porque tienen alguna diversidad de vocablos en nombres de las cosas. En fin, acabó de entender por señas su convite. El cual determinó de partir el domingo para allá, aunque no solía partir de puerto en domingo, sólo por su devoción y no por superstición alguna; pero con esperanza, dice él, que aquellos pueblos han de ser cristianos por la voluntad que muestran y de los Reyes de Castilla, y porque los tiene ya por suyos y porque le sirvan con amor, les quiere y trabaja hacer todo placer. Antes que partiese hoy, envió seis hombres a una población muy grande, tres leguas de allí de la parte del Oeste, porque el señor de ella vino el día pasado al Almirante y dijo que tenía ciertos pedazos de oro. En llegando allá los cristianos, tomó el señor de la mano al escribano del Almirante, que era uno de ellos, el cual enviaba el Almirante para que no consintiese hacer a los demás cosa indebida a los indios, porque como fuesen tan francos los indios y los españoles tan codiciosos y desmedidos, que no les basta que por un cabo de agujeta y aun por un pedazo de vidrio y de escudilla y por otras cosas de no nada les daban los indios cuanto querían; pero, aunque sin darles algo se lo querían todo haber y tomar, lo que el Almirante siempre prohibía, y aunque también eran muchas cosas de poco valor, si no era el oro, las que daban a los cristianos; pero el Almirante, mirando al franco corazón de los indios, que por seis cuentezuelas de vidrio darían y daban un pedazo de oro, por eso mandaba que ninguna cosa se recibiese de ellos que no se les diese algo en pago. Así que tomó por la mano el señor al escribano y lo llevó a su casa con todo el pueblo, que era muy grande, que le acompañaba, y les hizo dar de comer, y todos los indios les traían muchas cosas de algodón labradas y en ovillos hilado. Después que fue tarde, dioles tres ánsares muy gordas el señor y unos pedacitos de oro, y vinieron con ellos mucho número de gente y les traían todas las cosas que allá habían rescatado, y a ellos mismos porfiaban de traerlos a cuestas, y de hecho lo hicieron por algunos ríos y por algunos lugares lodosos. El Almirante mandó dar al señor algunas cosas, y quedó él y toda su gente con gran contentamiento, creyendo verdaderamente que había venido del cielo, y en ver los cristianos se tenían por bienaventurados. Vinieron este día más de ciento y veinte canoas a los navíos, todas cargadas de gente, y todos traen algo, especialmente de su pan y pescado y agua en cantarillos de barro y simientes de muchas simientes que son buenas especias: echaban un grano en una escudilla de agua y bébenla, y decían los indios que consigo traía el Almirante que era cosa sanísima.
Domingo, 23 de diciembre
No pudo partir con los navíos a la tierra de aquel señor que lo había enviado a rogar y convidar, por falta de viento; pero envió, con los tres mensajeros que allí esperaban, las barcas con gente y al escribano. Entre tanto que aquéllos iban, envió dos de los indios que consigo traía a las poblaciones que estaban por allí cerca del paraje de los navíos, y volvieron con un señor a la nao con nuevas que en aquella isla Española había gran cantidad de oro, y que a ella lo venían a comprar de otras partes, y dijéronle que allí hallaría cuanto quisiese. Vinieron otros que confirmaban haber en ella mucho oro, y mostrábanle la manera que se tenía en cogerlo. Todo aquello entendía el Almirante con pena; pero todavía tenía por cierto que en aquellas partes había grandísima cantidad de ello y que, hallando el lugar donde se saca, habrá gran barato de ello, y según imaginaba que por no nada. Y torna a decir que cree que debe haber mucho, porque en tres días que había que estaba en aquel puerto había habido buenos pedazos de oro, y no puede creer que allí lo traigan de otra tierra. «Nuestro Señor, que tiene en las manos todas las cosas, vea de me remediar y dar como fuere su servicio»; éstas son palabras del Almirante. Dice que aquella hora cree haber venido a la nao más de mil personas y que todas traían algo de lo que poseen; y antes que lleguen a la nao, con medio tiro de ballesta, se levantan en sus canoas en pie y toman en las manos lo que traen diciendo: «Tomad, tomad.» También cree que más de quinientos vinieron a la nao nadando por no tener canoas, y estaba surta cerca de una legua de tierra. Juzgaba que habían venido cinco señores, hijos de señores, con toda su casa, mujeres y niños, a ver los cristianos. A todos mandaba dar el Almirante, porque todo dice que era bien empleado, y dice: «Nuestro Señor me aderece, por su piedad, que halle este oro, digo su mina, que hartos tengo aquí que dicen que la saben»; éstas son sus palabras. En la noche llegaron las barcas, y dijeron que había gran camino hasta donde venían, y que al monte de Caribatan hallaron muchas canoas con muy mucha gente que venían a ver al Almirante y a los cristianos del lugar donde ellos iban. Y tenía por cierto que si aquella fiesta de Navidad pudiera estar en aquel puerto, viniera toda la gente de aquella isla, que estimaba ya por mayor que Inglaterra, por verlos; los cuales se volvieron todos con los cristianos a la población, la cual dice que afirmaba ser la mayor y la más concertada de calles que otras de las pasadas y halladas hasta allí, la cual dice que es parte de Punta Santa al Sudeste casi tres leguas. Y como las canoas andan mucho de remos, fuéronse delante a hacer saber al cacique, que ellos llamaban allí. Hasta entonces no había podido entender el Almirante silo dicen por rey o por gobernador. También dicen otro nombre por grande que llaman nitayno; no sabía silo dicen por hidalgo o gobernador o juez. Finalmente, el cacique vino a ellos y se ajuntaron en la plaza, que estaba muy barrida, todo el pueblo, que había más de dos mil hombres. Este rey hizo mucha honra a la gente de los navíos, y los populares cada uno les traía algo de comer y de beber. Después el rey dio a cada uno unos paños de algodón que visten las mujeres, y papagayos para el Almirante y ciertos pedazos de oro: daban también los populares de los mismos paños y otras cosas de sus casas a los marineros, por pequeña cosa que les daban, la cual, según la recibían, parecía que la estimaban por reliquias. Ya a la tarde, queriendo despedir, el rey les rogaba que aguardasen hasta otro día; lo mismo todo el pueblo. Visto que determinaban su venida, vinieron con ellos mucho del camino, trayéndoles a cuestas lo que el cacique y los otros les habían dado hasta las barcas, que quedaban a la entrada del río.
Lunes, 24 de diciembre
Antes de salido el sol, levantó las anclas con el viento terral. Entre los muchos indios que ayer habían venido a la nao, que les habían dado señales de haber en aquella isla oro y nombrado los lugares donde lo cogían, vio uno parece que más dispuesto y aficionado o que con más alegría le hablaba, y halagólo rogándole que se fuese con él a mostrarle las minas del oro. Este trajo otro compañero o pariente consigo, los cuales, entre los otros lugares que nombraban donde se cogía el oro dijeron de Cipango, al cual ellos llaman Cibao, y allí afirman que hay gran cantidad de oro, y que el cacique trae las banderas de oro de martillo, salvo que está muy lejos al Este. El Almirante dice aquí estas palabras a los Reyes: «Crean Vuestras Altezas que en el mundo todo no puede haber mejor gente, ni más mansa. Deben tomar Vuestras Altezas grande alegría porque luego los harán cristianos y los habrán enseñado en buenas costumbres de sus reinos, que más mejor gente ni tierra puede ser, y la gente y la tierra en tanta cantidad que yo no sé ya cómo lo escriba; porque yo he hablado en superlativo grado la gente y la tierra de la Juana, a que ellos llaman Cuba; mas hay tanta diferencia de ellos y de ella a ésta en todo como del día a la noche, ni creo que otro ninguno que esto hubiese visto hubiese hecho ni dijese menos de lo que yo tengo dicho, y digo que es verdad que es maravilla las cosas de acá y los pueblos grandes de esta isla Española, que así la llamé y ellos la llaman Bohío, y todos de muy singularísimo trato amoroso y habla dulce, no como los otros que parece cuando hablan que amenazan, y de buena estatura hombres y mujeres y no negro. Verdad es que todos se tiñen, algunos de negro y otros de otra color, y los más de colorado. He sabido que lo hacen por el sol, que no les haga tanto mal, y las casas y lugares tan hermosos, y con señorío en todos como juez o señor de ellos, y todos le obedecen que es maravilla, y todos estos señores son de pocas palabras y muy lindas costumbres, y su mando es lo más con hacer señas con la mano, y luego es entendido que es maravilla.» Todas son palabras del Almirante. Quien hubiere de entrar en la mar de Santo Tomé, se debe meter una buena legua sobre la boca de la entrada sobre una isleta llana que en el medio hay, que le puso nombre la Amiga, llevando la proa en ella. Y después que llegare a ella con el tiro de una piedra, pase de la parte del Oeste y quédele ella al Este, y se llegue a ella y no a la otra parte, porque viene una restinga muy grande del Oeste, y aun en la mar fuera de ella hay unas tres bajas, y esta restinga se llega a la Amiga un tiro de lombarda, y entremedias pasará y hallará a lo más bajo siete brazas, y cascajos abajo, y dentro hallará puerto para todas las naos del mundo y que estén sin amarras. Otra restinga y bajas vienen de la parte del Este a la dicha isla Amiga, y son muy grandes y salen en la mar mucho y llega hasta el cabo casi dos leguas; pero entre ellas pareció que había entrada a tiro de dos lombardas de la Amiga, y al pie del Monte Garibatan de la parte del Oeste hay un muy buen puerto y muy grande.
Martes, 25 de diciembre, día de Navidad
Navegando con poco viento el día de ayer desde la mar de Santo Tomé hasta la Punta Santa, sobre la cual a una legua estuvo así hasta pasado el primer cuarto, que serían a las once horas de la noche, acordó echarse a dormir, porque había dos días y una noche que no había dormido. Como fuese calma, el marinero que gobernaba la nao acordó irse a dormir, y dejó el gobernario a un mozo grumete, lo que mucho siempre había el Almirante prohibido en todo el viaje, que hubiese visto o que hubiese calma: conviene a saber, que no dejasen gobernar a los grumetes. El Almirante estaba seguro de bancos y de peñas, porque el domingo, cuando envió las barcas a aquel rey, habían pasado al Este de la dicha Punta Santa bien tres leguas y media, y habían visto los marineros toda la costa y los bajos que hay desde la dicha Punta Santa al Este bien tres leguas, y vieron por dónde se podía pasar, lo que todo este viaje no hizo. Quiso Nuestro Señor que a las doce horas de la noche, como habían visto acostar y reposar el Almirante y veían que era calma muerta y la mar como en una escudilla, todos se acostaron a dormir, y quedó el gobernalle en la mano de aquel muchacho, y las aguas que corrían llevaron la nao sobre uno de aquellos bancos. Los cuales, puesto que fuese de noche, sonaban que de una grande legua se oyeran y vieran, y fue sobre él tan mansamente que casi no se sentía. El mozo, que sintió el gobernalle y oyó el sonido de la mar, dio voces, a las cuales salió el Almirante y fue tan presto que aún ninguno había sentido que estuviesen encallados. Luego el maestre de la nao, cuya era la guardia, salió; y díjoles el Almirante a él y a los otros que halasen el batel que traían por popa y tomasen un anda y la echasen por popa, y él con otros muchos saltaron en el batel, y pensaba el Almirante que hacían lo que les había mandado. Ellos no curaron sino de huir a la carabela, que estaba a barlovento media legua. La carabela no los quiso recibir haciéndolo virtuosamente, y por esto volvieron a la nao; pero primero fue a ella la barca de la carabela. Cuando el Almirante vio que se huían y que era su gente, y las aguas menguaban y estaba ya la nao la mar de través, no viendo otro medio, mandó cortar el mástil y alijar de la nao todo cuanto pudieron para ver si podían sacarla; y como todavía las aguas menguasen no se pudo remediar, y tomó lado hacia la mar traviesa, puesto que la mar era poco o nada, y entonces se abrieron los conventos y no la nao. El Almirante fue a la carabela para poner en cobro la gente de la nao en la carabela y, como ventase ya vientecillo de la tierra y también aún quedaba mucho de la noche, ni supiesen cuánto duraban los bancos, temporejó a la corda hasta que fue de día, y luego fue a la nao por de dentro de la restinga del banco. Primero había enviado el batel a tierra con Diego de Arana, de Córdoba, alguacil de la Armada, y Pedro Gutiérrez, repostero de la Casa Real, a hacer saber al rey que los había enviado a convidar y rogar el sábado que se fuese con los navíos a su puerto, el cual tenía su villa adelante obra de una legua y media del dicho banco; el cual como lo supo dicen que lloró, y envió toda su gente de la villa con canoas muy grandes y muchas a descargar todo lo de la nao. Y así se hizo y se descargó todo lo de las cubiertas en muy breve espacio: tanto fue el grande aviamiento y diligencia que aquel rey dio. Y él con su persona, con hermanos y parientes, estaban poniendo diligencia, así en la nao como en la guarda de lo que se sacaba a tierra, para que todo estuviese a muy buen recaudo. De cuando en cuando enviaba uno de sus parientes al Almirante llorando a lo consolar, diciendo que no recibiese pena ni enojo, que él le daría cuanto tuviese. Certifica el Almirante a los Reyes que en ninguna parte de Castilla tan buen recaudo en todas las cosas se pudiera poner sin faltar una agujeta. Mandólo poner todo junto con las casas entretanto que se vaciaban algunas cosas que quería dar, donde se pusiese y guardase todo. Mandó poner hombres armados en rededor de todo, que velasen toda la noche. «El, con todo el pueblo, lloraban; tanto -dice el Almirante-, son gente de amor y sin codicia y convenibles para toda cosa, que certifico a Vuestras Altezas que en el mundo creo que no hay mejor gente ni mejor tierra: ellos aman a sus prójimos como a sí mismos, y tienen un habla la más dulce del mundo y mansa, y siempre con risa. Ellos andan desnudos, hombres y mujeres, como sus madres los parieron. Mas, crean Vuestras Altezas que entre sí tienen costumbres muy buenas, y el rey muy maravilloso estado, de una cierta manera tan continente que es placer de verlo todo, y la memoria que tienen, y todo quieren ver, y preguntan qué es y para qué.» Todo esto dice el Almirante.
Miércoles, 26 de diciembre
Hoy, al salir del sol, vino el rey de aquella tierra que estaba en aquel lugar a la carabela Niña, donde estaba el Almirante, y casi llorando le dijo que no tuviese pena, que él le daría cuanto tenía, y que había dado a los cristianos que estaban en tierra dos muy grandes casas, y que más les daría si fuesen menester, y cuantas canoas pudiesen cargar y descargar la nao, y poner en tierra cuanta gente quisiese; y que así lo había hecho ayer, sin que tomase una migaja de pan ni otra cosa alguna; «tanto -dice el Almirante- son fieles y sin codicia de lo ajeno»; y así era sobre todos aquel rey virtuoso. En tanto que el Almirante estaba hablando con él, vino otra canoa de otro lugar que traía ciertos pedazos de oro, los cuales quería dar por un cascabel, porque otra cosa tanto no deseaban como cascabeles. Que aún no llega la canoa a bordo cuando llamaban y mostraban los pedazos de oro, diciendo chuq chuq por cascabeles, que están en puntos de se tornar locos por ellos. Después de haber visto esto, y partiéndose estas canoas que eran de los otros lugares, llamaron al Almirante y le rogaron que les mandase guardar un cascabel hasta otro día, porque él traería cuatro pedazos de oro tan grandes como la mano. Holgó el Almirante de oír esto, y después un marinero que venía de tierra dijo al Almirante que era cosa de maravilla las piezas de oro que los cristianos que estaban en tierra rescataban por no nada; por una agujeta daban pedazos que serían más de dos castellanos, y que entonces no era nada al respecto de lo que sería dende a un mes. El rey se holgó mucho con ver al Almirante alegre, y entendió que deseaba mucho oro, y díjole por señas que él sabía cerca de allí donde había de ello muy mucho en grande suma, y que estuviese de buen corazón, que él le daría cuanto oro quisiese; y de ello dice que le daba razón, y en especial que lo había en Cipango, a que ellos llamaban Cibao, en tanto grado que ellos no le tienen en nada, y que él lo traería allí, aunque también en aquella isla Española, a quien llaman Bohío, y en aquella provincia Caribata lo había mucho más. El rey comió en la carabela con el Almirante, y después salió con él en tierra, donde hizo al Almirante mucha honra y le dio colación de dos o tres maneras de ajes y con camarones y caza y otras viandas que ellos tenían, y de su pan que llamaban cazabí; dende lo llevó a ver unas verduras de árboles junto a las casas, y andaban con él bien mil personas, todos desnudos. El señor ya traía camisa y guantes que el Almirante le había dado, y por los guantes hizo mayor fiesta que por cosa de las que le dio. En su comer, con su honestidad y hermosa manera de limpieza, se mostraba bien ser de linaje. Después de haber comido, que tardó buen rato estar a la mesa, trajeron ciertas hierbas con que se fregó mucho las manos; creyó el Almirante que lo hacía para ablandarlas, y diéronle aguamanos. Después que acabaron de comer, llevó a la playa al Almirante, y el Almirante envió por un arco turquesco y un manojo de flechas, y el Almirante hizo tirar a un hombre de su compañía, que sabía de ello, y el señor, como no sepa qué sean armas, porque no las tienen ni las usan, le pareció gran cosa; aunque dice que el comienzo fue sobre el habla de los Caniba, que ellos llaman caribes, que los vienen a tomar, y traen arcos y flechas sin hierro, que en todas aquellas tierras no había memoria de él ni de otro metal, salvo de oro y cobre, aunque cobre no había visto sino poco el Almirante. El Almirante le dijo por señas que los Reyes de Castilla mandarían destruir a los caribes y que a todos se los mandarían traer las manos atadas. Mandó el Almirante tirar una lombarda y una espingarda, y viendo el efecto que su fuerza hacían y lo que penetraban, quedó maravillado. Y cuando su gente oyó los tiros cayeron todos en tierra. Trajeron al Almirante una gran carátula que tenía grandes pedazos de oro en las orejas y en los ojos y en otras partes, la cual le dio con otras joyas de oro que el mismo rey había puesto al Almirante en la cabeza y al pescuezo; y a otros cristianos que con él estaban dio también muchas. El Almirante recibió mucho placer y consolación de estas cosas que veía, y se le templó la angustia y pena que había recibido y tenía de la pérdida de la nao, y conoció que Nuestro Señor había hecho encallar allí la nao porque hiciese allí asiento. «Y a esto -dice él- vinieron tantas cosas a la mano, que verdaderamente no fue aquél desastre, salvo gran ventura. Porque es cierto -dice él- que si yo no encallara, que yo fuera de largo sin surgir en este lugar, porque él está metido acá dentro en una grande bahía y en ella dos o tres restingas de bajas, ni este viaje dejara aquí gente, ni aunque yo quisiera dejarla no les pudiera dar tan buen aviamento ni tantos pertrechos ni tantos mantenimientos ni aderezos para fortaleza. Y bien es verdad que mucha gente de ésta que va aquí me habían rogado y hecho rogar que les quisiera dar licencia para quedarse. Ahora tengo ordenado de hacer una torre y fortaleza, todo muy bien, y una grande cava, no porque crea que haya esto menester por esta gente, porque tengo dicho que con esta gente que yo traigo sojuzgaría toda esta isla, la cual creo que es mayor que Portugal, y más gente al doble, mas son desnudos y sin armas y muy cobardes fuera de remedio. Mas es razón que se haga esta torre y se esté como se ha de estar, estando tan lejos de Vuestras Altezas, y porque conozcan el ingenio de la gente de Vuestras Altezas y lo que pueden hacer, porque con amor y temor le obedezcan; y así tendrán tablas para hacer todas las fortalezas de ellas y mantenimientos de pan y vino para más de un año y simientes para sembrar y la barca de la nao y un calafate y un carpintero y un lombardero y un tonelero y muchos entre ellos hombres que desean mucho, por servicio de Vuestras Altezas y me hacer placer, de saber de la mina donde se coge el oro. Así que todo es venido mucho a pelo para que se haga este comienzo; y sobre todo que, cuando encalló la nao fue tan paso que casi no se sintió ni había ola ni viento.» Todo esto dice el Almirante. Y añade más para mostrar que fue gran ventura y determinada voluntad de Dios que la nao allí encallase porque dejase allí gente, que si no fuera por la traición del maestre y de la gente, que eran todos o los más de su tierra, de no querer echar el anda por popa para sacar la nao, como el Almirante los mandaba, la nao se salvara, y así no pudiera saberse la tierra, dice él, como se supo aquellos días que allí estuvo, y adelante por los que allí entendía dejar, porque él iba siempre con intención de descubrir y no parar en parte más de un día si no era por falta de los vientos, porque la nao dice que era muy pesada y no para el oficio de descubrir. Y llevar tal nao dice que causaron los de Palos, que no cumplieron con el Rey y la Reina lo que le habían prometido: dar navíos convenientes para aquella jornada, y no lo hicieron. Concluye el Almirante diciendo que de todo lo que en la nao había no se perdió una agujeta, ni tabla ni clavo, porque ella quedó sana como cuando partió, salvo que se cortó y rajó algo para sacar la vasija y todas las mercaderías, y pusiéronlas todas en tierra y bien guardadas, como está dicho; y dice que espera en Dios que a la vuelta que él entendía hacer de Castilla, había de hallar un tonel de oro que habrían rescatado los que había de dejar y que habrían hallado la mina del oro y la especiería, y aquello en tanta cantidad que los Reyes antes de tres años emprendiesen y aderezasen para ir a conquistar la Casa Santa, «que así -dice él- protesté a Vuestras Altezas que toda la ganancia de esta mi empresa se gastase en la conquista de Jerusalén, y Vuestras Altezas se rieron y dijeron que les placía, y que sin esto tenían aquella gana». Palabras del Almirante.
Jueves, 27 de diciembre
En saliendo el sol, vino a la carabela el rey de aquella tierra, y dijo al Almirante que había enviado por oro y que lo quería cubrir todo de oro antes que se fuese, antes le rogaba que no se fuese; y comieron con el Almirante el rey y un hermano suyo y otro pariente muy privado, los cuales dos le dijeron que querían ir a Castilla con él. Estando en esto, vinieron ciertos indios con nuevas cómo la carabela Pinta estaba en un río al cabo de aquella isla; luego envió el cacique allá una canoa, y en ella el Almirante un marinero, porque amaba tanto al Almirante que era maravilla. Ya entendía el Almirante con cuánta prisa podía por despacharse para la vuelta de Castilla.
Viernes, 28 de diciembre
Para dar orden y prisa en el acabar de hacer la fortaleza y en la gente que en ella había de quedar, salió el Almirante en tierra y parecióle que el rey le había visto cuando iba en la barca; el cual se entró presto en su casa disimulando, y envió a un su hermano que recibiese al Almirante y llevólo a una de las casas que tenía dadas a la gente del Almirante, la cual era la mayor y mejor de aquella villa. En ella le tenían aparejado un estrado de camisas de palma, donde le hicieron asentar. Después el hermano envió un escudero suyo a decir al rey que el Almirante estaba allí, como que el rey no sabía que era venido, puesto que el Almirante creía que lo disimulaba por hacerle mucha más honra. Como el escudero se lo dijo, dio el cacique dice que a correr para el Almirante, y púsole al pescuezo una gran plasta de oro que traía en la mano. Estuvo allí con él hasta la tarde, deliberando lo que había de hacer.
Sábado, 29 de diciembre
En saliendo el sol, vino a la carabela un sobrino del rey muy mozo y de buen entendimiento y buenos hígados (como dice el Almirante); y como siempre trabajase por saber adónde se cogía el oro, preguntaba a cada uno, porque por señas ya entendía algo, y así aquel mancebo le dijo que a cuatro jornadas había una isla al Este que se llama Guarionex, y otras que se llamaban Mocorix y Mayonic y Fuma y Cibao y Coroay, en las cuales había infinito oro, los cuales nombres escribió el Almirante; y supo esto que le había dicho un hermano del rey, y riñó con él, según el Almirante entendió. También otras veces había el Almirante entendido que el rey trabajaba porque no entendiese dónde nacía y se cogía el oro, porque no lo fuese a rescatar o comprar a otra parte. «Mas es tanto y en tantos lugares y en esta misma isla Española -dice el Almirante-, que es maravilla.» Siendo ya de noche le envió el rey una gran carátula de oro, y envióle a pedir un bacín para mandar hacer otro, y así se lo envió.
Domingo, 30 de diciembre
Salió el Almirante a comer a tierra, y llegó a tiempo que habían venido cinco reyes sujetos a aqueste que se llamaba Guacanagarí, todos con sus coronas, representando muy buen estado, que dice el Almirante a los Reyes que Sus Altezas hubieran placer de ver la manera de ellos. En llegando en tierra, el rey vino a recibir al Almirante, y lo llevó de brazos a la misma casa de ayer, donde tenía un estrado y sillas en que asentó al Almirante; y luego se quitó la corona de la cabeza y se la puso al Almirante, y el Almirante se quitó del pescuezo un collar de buenos alaqueques y cuentas muy hermosas de muy lindos colores, que parecía muy bien en toda parte, y se lo puso a él, y se desnudó un capuz de fina grana, que aquel día se había vestido, y se lo vistió, y envió por unos borceguíes de color que le hizo calzar, y le puso en el dedo un grande anillo de plata, porque habían dicho que vieron una sortija de plata a un marinero y que había hecho mucho por ella. Quedó muy alegre y muy contento, y dos de aquellos reyes que estaban con él vinieron adonde el Almirante estaba con él y trajeron al Almirante dos grandes plastas de oro, cada uno la suya. Y estando así vino un indio diciendo que había dos días que dejara la carabela Pinta al Este en un puerto. Tornóse el Almirante a la carabela, y Vicente Yáñez, capitán de ella, afirmó que había visto ruibarbo y que lo había en la isla Amiga, que está a la entrada de la mar de Santo Tomé, que estaba seis leguas de allí, y que había conocido los ramos y raíz. Dicen que el ruibarbo echa unos ramitos fuera de tierra y unos frutos que parecen moras verdes casi secas, y el palillo que está cerca de la raíz es tan amarillo y tan fino como la mejor color que puede ser para pintar, y debajo de la tierra hace la raíz como una grande pera.
Lunes, 31 de diciembre
Aqueste día se ocupó en mandar tomar agua y leña para la partida a España por dar noticia presto a los Reyes para que enviasen navíos que descubriesen lo que quedaba por descubrir, porque ya «el negocio parecía tan grande y de tanto tomo que es maravilla», dijo el Almirante. Y dice que no quisiera partirse hasta que hubiere visto toda aquella tierra que iba hacia el Este y andaría toda por la costa, por saber también dice que el tránsito de Castilla a ella, para traer ganados y otras cosas. Mas, como hubiese quedado con un solo navío, no le parecía razonable cosa ponerse a los peligros que le pudieran ocurrir descubriendo. Y quejábase que todo aquel mal e inconveniente haberse apartado de él la carabela Pinta.
Martes, 1 de enero de 1493
A media noche despachó la barca que fuese a la isleta Amiga para traer el ruibarbo. Volvió a vísperas con un serón de ello; no trajeron más porque no llevaron azada para cavar: aquello llevó por muestra a los Reyes. El rey de aquella tierra dice que había enviado muchas canoas por oro. Vino la canoa que fue a saber de la Pinta y el marinero y no la hallaron. Dijo aquel marinero que a veinte leguas de allí habían visto un rey que traía en la cabeza dos grandes plastas de oro, y luego que los indios de la canoa le hablaron se las quitó, y vio también mucho oro a otras personas. Creyó el Almirante que el rey Guacanagarí debía de haber prohibido a todos que no vendiesen oro a los cristianos, porque pasase todo por su mano. Mas él había sabido los lugares, como dije anteayer, donde lo había en tanta cantidad que no lo tenían en precio. También la especiería que, como dice el Almirante, es mucha y más vale que pimiento y manegueta. Dejaba encomendados a los que allí quería dejar que hubiesen cuanta pudiesen.
Miércoles, 2 de enero
Salió de mañana en tierra para se despedir del rey Guacanagarí y partirse en el nombre del Señor, y diole una camisa suya y mostróle la fuerza que tenían y efecto que hacían las lombardas, por lo cual mandó armar una y tirar al costado de la nao que estaba en tierra, porque vino a propósito de platicar sobre los caribes, con quien tienen guerra, y vio hasta dónde llegó la lombarda y cómo pasó el costado de la nao y fue muy lejos la piedra por la mar. Hizo hacer también una escaramuza con la gente de los navíos armada, diciendo al cacique que no hubiese miedo a los caribes aunque viniesen. Todo esto dice que hizo el Almirante porque tuviese por amigos a los cristianos que dejaba, y por ponerle miedo que los temiese. Llevólo el Almirante a comer consigo a la casa donde estaba aposentado y a los otros que iban con él. Encomendóle mucho el Almirante a Diego de Arana y a Pedro Gutiérrez y a Rodrigo Escobedo, que dejaba juntamente por sus tenientes de aquella gente que allí dejaba, porque todo fuese bien regido y gobernado a servicio de Dios y de Sus Altezas. Mostró mucho amor el cacique al Almirante y gran sentimiento en su partida, mayormente cuando lo vio ir a embarcarse. Dijo al Almirante un privado de aquel rey, que había mandado hacer una estatua de oro puro tan grande como el mismo Almirante, y que dende a diez días la habían de traer. Embarcóse con propósito de se partir luego, mas el viento no le dio lugar. Dejó en aquella isla Española, que los indios dice que llamaban Bohío, treinta y nueve hombres con la fortaleza, y dice que muchos amigos de aquel rey Guacanagarí, y sobre aquélíos, por sus tenientes, a Diego de Arana, natural de Córdoba, y a Pedro Gutiérrez, repostero de estrado del Rey, criado del despensero mayor, y a Rodrigo de Escobedo, natural de Segovia, sobrino de fray Rodrigo Pérez, con todos sus poderes que de los Reyes tenía. Dejóles todas las mercaderías que los Reyes mandaron comprar para los rescates, que eran muchas, para que las trocasen y rescatasen por oro, con todo lo que traía la nao. Dejóles también pan bizcocho para un año y vino y mucha artillería, y la barca de la nao para que ellos, como marineros que eran los más, fuesen, cuando viesen que convenía, a descubrir la mina de oro, porque a la vuelta que volviese el Almirante hallase mucho oro, y lugar donde se asentase una villa, porque aquél no era puerto a su voluntad; mayormente que el oro que allí traían venía dice que del Este, y cuanto más fuesen al Este tanto estaban cercanos de España. Dejóles también simientes para sembrar, y sus oficiales, escribano y alguacil, y un carpintero de naos y calafate y un buen lombardero, que sabe bien de ingenios, y un tonelero y un físico y un sastre, y todos dice que hombres de la mar.
Jueves, 3 de enero
No partió hoy porque anoche dice que vinieron tres de los indios que traía de las islas que se habían quedado, y dijéronle que los otros y sus mujeres vendrían al salir del sol. La mar también fue algo alterada, y no pudo la barca estar en tierra; determinó partir mañana, mediante la gracia de Dios. Dijo que si él tuviera consigo la carabela Pinta tuviera por cierto de llevar un tonel de oro, porque osara seguir las costas de estas islas, lo que no osaba hacer por ser solo, porque no le acaeciese algún inconveniente y se impidiese su vuelta a Castilla y la noticia que debía dar a los Reyes de todas las cosas que había hallado. Y si fuera cierto que la carabela Pinta llegara a salvamento en España con aquel Martín Alonso Pinzón, dijo que no dejara de hacer lo que deseaba; pero porque no sabía de él y porque, ya que vaya, podrá informar a los Reyes de mentiras porque no le manden dar la pena que él merecía, como quien tanto mal había hecho y hacía en haberse ido sin licencia y estorbar los bienes que pudieran hacerse y saberse de aquella vez, dice el Almirante, confiaba que Nuestro Señor le daría buen tiempo y se podría remediar todo.
Viernes, 4 de enero
Saliendo el sol, levantó las anclas con poco viento, con la barca por proa el camino del Noroeste para salir fuera de la restinga, por otra canal más ancha de la que entró, la cual y otras son muy buenas para ir por delante de la Villa de la Navidad, y por todo aquello el más bajo fondo que halló fueron tres brazas hasta nueve, y estas dos van de Noroeste al Sudeste, según aquellas restingas eran grandes que duran desde el Cabo Santo hasta el Cabo de Sierpe, que son más de seis leguas, y fuera en la mar bien tres y sobre el Cabo Santo bien tres, y sobre el Cabo Santo a una legua no hay más de ocho brazas de fondo, y dentro del dicho cabo, de la parte del Este, hay muchos bajos y canales para entrar por ellos, y toda aquella costa se corre Noroeste Sudeste y es toda playa, y la tierra muy llana hasta bien cuatro leguas la tierra adentro. Después hay montañas muy altas y es toda muy poblada de poblaciones grandes y buena gente, según se mostraban con los cristianos. Navegó así al Este, camino de un monte muy alto que quiere parecer isla pero no lo es, porque tiene participación con tierra muy baja, el cual tiene forma de un alfaneque muy hermoso, al cual puso nombre Monte Cristi, el cual está justamente al Este del Cabo Santo, y habrá dieciocho leguas. Aquel día, por ser el viento muy poco, no pudo llegar al Monte Cristi con seis leguas. Halló cuatro isletas de arena muy bajas, con una restinga que salía mucho al Noroeste y andaba mucho al Sudeste. Dentro hay un grande golfo que va desde dicho monte al Sudeste bien veinte leguas, el cual debe ser todo de poco fondo y muchos bancos, y dentro de él en toda la costa muclios ríos no navegables, aunque aquel marinero que el Almirante envió con la canoa a saber nuevas de la Pinta dijo que vio un río en el cual podían entrar naos. Surgió por allí el Almirante seis leguas de Monte Cristi en diecinueve brazas, dando la vuelta a la mar por apartarse de muchos bajos y restingas que por allí había, donde estuvo aquella noche. Da el Almirante aviso que el que hubiere de ir a la Villa de la Navidad, que conociere a Monte Cristi, debe meterse en la mar dos leguas, etc.; pero porque ya se sabe la tierra y más por allí no se pone aquí. Concluye que Cipango estaba en aquella isla y que hay mucho oro y especiería y almáciga y ruibarbo.
Sábado, 5 de enero
Cuando el sol quería salir, dio la vela con el terral; después ventó Este, y vio que de la parte del Sursudeste del Monte Cristi, entre él y una isleta, parecía ser buen puerto para surgir esta noche, y tomó el camino al Essueste, y después al Sursudeste bien seis leguas, diecisiete brazas de fondo y muy limpio, y anduvo así tres leguas con el mismo fondo. Después bajó a doce brazas hasta el morro del monte, y sobre el morro del monte a una legua halló nueve, y limpio todo, arena menuda. Siguió así el camino hasta que entró entre el monte y la isleta, adonde halló tres brazas y media de fondo con bajamar, muy singular puerto adonde surgió. Fue con la barca a la isleta, donde halló fuego y rastro de que habían estado allí pescadores. Vio allí muchas piedras pintadas de colores, o cantera de piedras tales de labores naturales muy hermosas, dice que para edificios de iglesia o de otras obras reales, como las que halló en la isleta de San Salvador. Halló también en esta isleta muchos pies de almáciga. Este Monte Cristi dice que es muy hermoso y alto y andable, de muy linda hechura, y toda la tierra cerca de él es maja, muy linda campiña, y él queda así alto que viéndolo de lejos parece isla que no comunique con alguna tierra. Después del dicho monte, al Este, vio un cabo a veinticuatro millas al cual llamó Cabo del Becerro, desde el cual hasta el dicho monte pasan en la mar bien dos leguas unas restingas de bajos, aunque le pareció que había entre ellas canales para poder entrar; pero conviene que sea de día y vaya sondando con la barca primero. Desde el dicho monte al Este hacia el Cabo del Becerro las cuatro leguas es todo playa y tierra muy baja y hermosa, y lo otro es todo tierra muy alta y grandes montañas labradas y hermosas, y dentro de la tierra va una sierra de Nordeste al Sudeste, la más hermosa que había visto, que parece propia como la sierra de Córdoba. Parecen también muy lejos otras montañas muy altas hacia el Sur y del Sudeste y muy grandes valles y muy verdes y muy hermosos y muy muchos ríos de agua; todo esto en tanta cantidad apacible que no creía encarecerlo la milésima parte. Después vio, al Este de dicho monte, una tierra que parecía otro monte, así como aquel de Cristi en grandeza y hermosura. Y dende a la cuarta del Este al Nordeste es tierra no tan alta, y habría bien cien millas o cerca.
Domingo, 6 de enero
Aquel puerto es abrigado de todos los vientos, salvo de Norte y Noroeste, y dice que poco reinan por aquella tierra, y aun de éstos se pueden guarecer detrás de la isleta: tiene tres hasta cuatro brazas. Salido el sol, dio la vela por ir la costa delante, la cual toda corría al Este, salvo que es menester dar reguardo a muchas restingas de piedra y arena que hay en la dicha costa. Verdad es que dentro de ellas hay buenos puertos y buenas entradas por su canales. Después de medio día ventó Este recio, y mandó subir a un marinero al topo del mástil para mirar los bajos, y vio venir la carabela Pinta con Este a popa, y llegó al Almirante, y porque no había donde surgir por ser bajo, volvióse el Almirante al Monte Cristi a desandar diez leguas atrás que había andado, y la Pinta con él. Vino Alonso Pinzón a la carabela Niña, donde iba el Almirante, a se excusar diciendo que se había partido de él contra su voluntad, dando razones por ello; pero el Almirante dice que eran falsas todas, y que con mucha soberbia y codicia se había apartado aquella noche que se apartó de él, y que no sabía, dice el Almirante, de dónde le hubiesen venido las soberbias y deshonestidad que había usado con él aquel viaje, las cuales quiso el Almirante disimular por no dar lugar a las malas obras de Satanás, que deseaba impedir aquel viaje como hasta entonces había hecho, sino que por dicho de un indio de los que el Almirante le había encomendado con otros que llevaba en su carabela, el cual le había dicho que en una isla que se llamaba Baneque había mucho oro, y como tenía el navío sutil y ligero se quiso apartar e ir por sí dejando al Almirante. Pero el Almirante quisose detener y costear la isla Juana y la Española, pues todo era un camino del Este. Después que Martín Alonso fue a la isla Baneque dice que no halló nada de oro, y se vino a la costa de la Española por información de otros indios que le dijeron haber en aquella isla Española, que los indios llamaban Bohío, mucha cantidad de oro y muchas minas, y por esta causa llegó cerca de la Villa de la Navidad, obra de quince leguas, y había entonces más de veinte días; por lo cual parece que fueron verdad las nuevas que los indios daban, por las cuales envió el rey Guacanagarí la canoa, y el Almirante el marinero, y debía ser ida cuando la canoa llegó. Y dice aquí el Almirante que rescató la carabela mucho oro, que por un cabo de agujeta le daban buenos pedazos de oro del tamaño de dos dedos y a veces como la mano, y llevaba el Martín Alonso la mitad y la otra mitad se repartía por la gente. Añade el Almirante diciendo a los Reyes: «Así que, Señores Príncipes, que yo conozco que milagrosamente mandó quedar allí aquella nao Nuestro Señor, porque es el mejor lugar de toda la isla para hacer el asiento y más cerca de las minas del oro.» También dice que supo que detrás de la isla Juana, de la parte del Sur, hay otra isla grande, en que hay muy mayor cantidad de oro que en ésta, en tanto grado que cogían los pedazos mayores que habas, y en la isla Española se cogían pedazos de oro de las minas como granos de trigo Llamábase, dice, aquella isla Yamaye. También dice que supo el Almirante que allí, hacia el Este, había una isla adonde no había sino solas mujeres, y esto dice que de muchas personas lo sabía. Y que aquella isla Española, y la otra isla Yamaye, estaban cerca de tierra firme diez jornadas de canoa, que podían ser sesenta o setenta leguas, y que era la gente vestida allí.
Lunes, 7 de enero
Este día hizo tomar una agua que hacía la carabela y calafatearía, y fueron los marineros en tierra a traer leña y dice que hallaron muchos almácigos y liñáloe.
Martes, 8 de enero
Por el viento Este y Sudeste mucho que ventaba no partió este día, por lo cual mandó que se guarneciese la carabela de agua y leña y de todo lo necesario para todo el viaje, porque, aunque tenía voluntad de costear toda la costa de aquella Española que andando el camino pudiese, pero, porque los que puso en las carabelas por capitanes eran hermanos, conviene a saber Martín Alonso Pinzón y Vicente Yáñez, y otros que le seguían con soberbia y codicia estimando que todo era ya suyo, no mirando la honra que el Almirante les había hecho y dado, no habían obedecido ni obedecían sus mandamientos, antes hacían y decían muchas cosas no debidas contra él, y el Martín Alonso lo dejó desde el 21 de noviembre hasta el 6 de enero sin causa alguna ni razón sino por su desobediencia, todo lo cual el Almirante había sufrido y callado por dar buen fin a su viaje, así que, por salir de tan mala compañía, con los cuales dice que cumplía disimular, aunque eran gente desmandada, y aunque tenía dice que consigo muchos hombres de bien, pero no era tiempo de entender en castigo, acordó volverse y no parar más, con la mayor prisa que le fue posible. Entró en la barca y fue al río, que es allí junto, hacia el Sursudoeste del Monte Cristi una grande legua, donde iban los marineros a tomar agua para el navío, y halló que el arena de la boca del río, el cual es muy grande y hondo, era dice que toda llena de oro y en tanto grado que era maravilla, puesto que era muy menudo. Creía el Almirante que por venir por aquel río abajo se desmenuzaba por el camino, puesto que dice que en poco espacio halló muchos granos tan grandes como lentejas; mas de lo menudito dice que había mucha cantidad. Y, porque la mar era llena y entraba agua salada con la dulce, mandó subir con la barca el río arriba un tiro de piedra: henchieron los barriles desde la barca y, volviéndose a la carabela, hallaron metidos por los aros de los barriles pedacitos de oro, y lo mismo en los aros de la pipa. Puso por nombre el Almirante al río el Río del Oro, el cual de dentro pasada la entrada muy hondo, aunque la entrada es baja y la boca muy ancha, y de él a la Villa de Navidad hay diecisiete leguas. Entremedias hay otros muchos ríos grandes; en especial tres, los cuales creía que debían tener mucho más oro que aquél, porque son más grandes, puesto que éste es casi tan grande como el Guadalquivir por Córdoba; y de ellos a las minas del oro no hay veinte leguas ~ Dice más el Almirante: que no quiso tomar de la dicha arena que tenía tanto oro, pues Sus Altezas lo tenían todo en casa y a la puerta de su Villa de Navidad, sino venirse a más andar por llevarles las nuevas y quitarse de la mala compañía que tenía y que siempre había dicho que era gente desmandada.
Miércoles, 9 de enero
A media noche levantó las velas con el viento Sudeste y navegó al Esnordeste; llegó a una punta que llamó Punta Roja, que está justamente al Este del Monte Cristi sesenta millas. Y al abrigo de ella surgió a la tarde, que serían tres horas antes de que anocheciese. No osó salir de allí de noche, porque había muchas restingas, hasta que se sepan, porque después serán provechosas si tienen, como deben tener, canales, y tienen mucho fondo y buen surgidero seguro de todos vientos. Estas tierras, desde Monte Cristi hasta allí donde surgió, son tierras altas y llanas y muy lindas campiñas, y a las espaldas muy hermosos montes que van de Este a Oeste, y son todos labrados y verdes, que es cosa de maravilla ver su hermosura, y tienen muchas riberas de agua. En toda esta tierra hay muchas tortugas, de las cuales tomaron los marineros en el Monte Cristi que venían a desovar en tierra, y eran muy grandes como una grande tablachina. El día pasado, cuando el Almirante iba al Río del Oro, dijo que vio tres sirenas que salieron bien alto de la mar, pero no eran tan hermosas como las pintan, que en alguna manera tenían forma de hombre en la cara. Dijo que otras veces vio algunas en Guinea, en la Costa Manegueta. Dice que esta noche, con el nombre de Nuestro Señor, partiría a su viaje sin más detenerse en cosa alguna, pues había hallado lo que buscaba, porque no quiere más enojo con aquel Martín Alonso hasta que Sus Altezas supiesen las nuevas de su viaje y de lo que ha hecho; «y después no sufriré -dice él- hechos de malas personas y de poca virtud, las cuales contra quien les dio aquella honra presumen hacer su voluntad con poco acatamiento».
Jueves, 10 de enero
Partióse de donde había surgido, y al sol puesto llegó a un río, al cual puso nombre río de Gracia; dista de la parte del Sudeste tres leguas. Surgió a la boca, que es buen surgidero, a la parte del Este. Para entrar dentro tiene un banco, que no tiene sino dos brazas de agua y muy angosto: dentro es buen puerto cerrado, sino que tiene mucha broma. Y de ella iba la carabela Pinta, donde iba Martín Alonso, muy maltratada, porque dice que estuvo allí rescatando dieciséis días, donde rescataron mucho oro, que era lo que deseaba Martín Alonso. El cual, después que supo de los indios que el Almirante estaba en la costa de la misma isla Española y que no lo podía errar, se vino para él. Y dice que quisiera que toda la gente del navío jurara que no habían estado allí sino seis días. Mas dice que era cosa tan pública su maldad, que no podía encubrir. El cual, dice el Almirante, tenía hechas leyes que fuese para él la mitad del oro que se rescatase o se hubiese. Y cuando hubo de partirse de allí, tomó cuatro hombres indios y dos mozos por fuerza, a los cuales el Almirante mandó dar de vestir y tornar en tierra que se fuesen a sus casas; «lo cual -dice- es servicio de Vuestras Altezas, así de esta isla en especial como de las otras. Mas aquí, donde tienen ya asiento Vuestras Altezas, se debe hacer honra y favor a los pueblos, pues que en esta isla hay tanto oro y buenas tierras y especiería».
Viernes, 11 de enero
A media noche salió del Río de Gracia con el terral; navegó al Este, hasta un cabo que llamó Belprado, cuatro leguas; y de allí al Sudeste está el monte a quien puso Monte de Plata y dice que hay ocho leguas. De allí del cabo Belprado, al Este cuarta del Sudeste, está el cabo que dijo del Angel, y hay dieciocho leguas; y de este cabo al Monte de Plata hay un golfo y tierras las mejores y más lindas del mundo, todas campiñas altas y hermosas, que van mucho la tierra adentro, y después hay una sierra, que va de Este a Oeste, muy grande y muy hermosa; y al pie del monte hay un puerto muy bueno y en la entrada tiene catorce brazas, y este monte es muy alto y hermoso, y todo esto es poblado mucho. Y creía el Almirante debía haber buenos ríos y mucho oro. Del Cabo del Angel al Este cuarta del Sudeste, hay cuatro leguas a una punta que puso del Hierro; y al mismo camino, a cuatro leguas, está una punta que llamó la Punta Seca; y de allí al mismo camino, a seis leguas, está el cabo que dijo Redondo; y de allí al Este está el cabo Francés; y en este cabo, de la parte del Este, hay una angla grande, mas no le pareció haber surgidero. De allí a una legua está el Cabo del Buen Tiempo; de éste al Sur cuarta del Sudeste hay un cabo que llamó Tejado, una grande legua; y de éste hacia el Sur vio otro cabo, y parecióle que habría quince leguas. Hoy hizo gran camino, porque el viento y las corrientes iban con él. No osó surgir, por miedo a los bajos, y así estuvo a la corda toda la noche.
Sábado, 12 de enero
Al cuarto del alba navegó al Este con viento fresco y anduvo así hasta el día, y en este tiempo veinte millas, y en dos horas después andaría veinticuatro millas. De allí vio al Sur tierra, y fue hacia ella, y estaría de ella cuarenta y ocho millas y dice que, dado resguardo al navío, andaría esta noche veintiocho millas al Nornordeste. Cuando vio la tierra, llamó a un cabo que vio el Cabo de Padre e Hijo, porque a la punta de la parte del Este tiene dos farallones, mayor el uno que el otro. Después, al Este dos leguas, vio una grande abra y muy hermosa entre dos grandes montañas, y vio que era grandísimo puerto, bueno y de muy buena entrada; pero, por ser muy de mañana y no perder camino, porque por la mayor parte del tiempo hace por allí Estes y entonces le lleva Nornoroeste, no quiso detenerse más. Siguió su camino al Este hasta un cabo muy alto y muy hermoso y todo de piedra tajado a quien puso por nombre Cabo del Enamorado, el cual estaba al Este de aquel puerto a quien llamó Puerto Sacro, treinta y dos millas; y, en llegando a él, descubrió otro muy más hermoso y más alto y redondo, de peña todo, así como el Cabo de San Vicente en Portugal, y estaba del Enamorado al Este doce millas. Después que llegó a emparejarse con el del Enamorado, vio, entremedias de él y de otro, que se hacía una grandísima bahía que tiene de anchor tres leguas, y en medio de ella está una isleta pequeñuela; el fondo es mucho a la entrada hasta tierra. Surgió allí en doce brazas, envió la barca en tierra por agua y por ver si había lengua, pero la gente toda huyó. Surgió también por ver si toda era aquella una tierra con la Española; y lo que dijo ser golfo sospechaba no fuese otra isla por sí. Quedaba espantado de ser tan grande la isla Española.
Domingo, 13 de enero
No salió de este puerto por no hacer terral con que saliese. Quisiera salir por ir a otro mejor puerto, porque aquél era algo descubierto, y porque quería ver en qué paraba la conjunción de la Luna con el Sol, que esperaba a 17 de este mes, y la oposición de ella con Júpiter y conjunción con Mercurio y el Sol en opósito con Júpiter, que es causa de grandes vientos. Envió la barca a tierra en una hermosa playa para que tomasen de los ajes para comer, y hallaron ciertos hombres con arcos y flechas, con los cuales se pararon a hablar, y les compraron dos arcos y muchas flechas y rogaron a uno de ellos que fuese a hablar al Almirante a la carabela; y vino, el cual dice que era muy disforme en la catadura más que otros que hubiesen visto. Tenía el rostro todo tiznado de carbón, puesto que en todas partes acostumbran de se teñir de diversos colores. Traía todos los cabellos muy largos y encogidos y atados atrás y después puestos en una redecilla de plumas de papagayos, y él así desnudo como los otros. Juzgó el Almirante que debía ser de los caribes que comen los hombres, y que aquel golfo que ayer había visto que hacía apartamiento de tierra y que sería isla por sí. Preguntóle por los caribes y señalóle al Este, cerca de allí; la cual dice que ayer vio el Almirante antes que entrase en aquella bahía, y díjole el indio que en ella había muy mucho oro, señalándole la popa de la carabela, que era bien grande, y que pedazos había tan grandes. Llamaba al oro tuob y no entendía por caona, como le llaman en la primera parte de la isla, ni por nocay, como lo nombran en San Salvador y en las otras islas. Al alambre o a un oro bajo llaman en La Española tuob. De la isla de Matinino dijo aquel indio que era toda poblada de mujeres sin hombres, y que en ella hay mucho tuob, que es oro o alambre, y que es más al Este de Carib. También dijo de la isla de Goanin, adonde hay mucho tuob. De estas islas dice el Almirante que por muchas personas hace días había noticia. Dice más el Almirante; que en las islas pasadas estaban con gran temor de Carib, y en algunas le llamaban Caniba, pero en La Española Carib; y que debe de ser gente arriscada, pues andan por todas estas islas y comen la gente que pueden haber. Dice que entendía algunas palabras, y por ellas dice que saca otras cosas, y que los indios que consigo traía entendían más, puesto que hallaba diferencia de lenguas por la gran distancia de las tierras. Mandó dar al indio de comer, y diole pedazos de paño verde y colorado y cuentezuelas de vidrio, a que ellos son muy aficionados, y tornóle a enviar a tierra y díjole que trajese oro si lo había, lo cual creía por algunas cositas suyas que él traía. En llegando la barca a tierra, estaban detrás los árboles bien cincuenta y cinco hombres desnudos, con los cabellos muy largos, así como las mujeres los traen en Castilla. Detrás de la cabeza traían penachos de plumas de papagayos y de otras aves, y cada uno traía su arco. Descendió el indio en tierra e hizo que los otros dejasen sus arcos y flechas, y un pedazo de palo que es como un... muy pesado que traen en lugar de espada; los cuales después se llegaron a la barca, y la gente de la barca salió a tierra y comenzáronles a comprar los arcos y flechas y las otras armas, porque el Almirante así lo tenía ordenado. Vendidos dos arcos, no quisieron dar más; antes se aparejaron de arremeter a los cristianos y prenderlos. Fueron corriendo a tomar sus arcos y flechas donde los tenían apartados y tornaron con cuerdas en las manos para dice que atar a los cristianos. Viéndolos venir corriendo a ellos, estando los cristianos apercibidos, porque siempre los avisaba de esto el Almirante, arremetieron los cristianos a ellos, y dieron a un indio una gran cuchillada en las nalgas y a otro por los pechos hirieron con una saetada, a lo cual, visto que podían ganar poco aunque no eran los cristianos sino siete y ellos cincuenta y tantos, dieron a huir que no quedó ninguno, dejando uno aquí las flechas y otro allí los arcos. Mataran dice que los cristianos muchos de ellos si el piloto que iba por capitán de ellos no lo estorbara. Volviéronse luego a la carabela los cristianos con su barca, y, sabido por el Almirante, dijo que por una parte le había pesado y por otra no, porque hayan miedo a los cristianos, porque sin duda, dice él, la gente de allí es dice que de mal hacer y que creía que eran los de Carib y que comiesen los hombres, y porque, viniendo por allí la barca que dejó a los treinta y nueve hombres en la fortaleza y Villa de la Navidad, tengan miedo de hacerles algún mal. Y que si no son de los caribes, al menos deben ser fronteros y de las mismas costumbres y gente sin miedo, no como los otros de las otras islas, que son cobardes y sin armas fuera de razón. Todo esto dice el Almirante y que querría tomar algunos de ellos. Dice que hacían muchas ahumadas como acostumbraban en aquella isla Española.
Lunes, 14 de enero
Quisiera enviar esta noche a buscar las casas de aquellos indios por tomar algunos de ellos, creyendo que eran caribes, y... por el mucho Este y Nordeste y mucha ola que hizo en la mar; pero, ya de día, vieron mucha gente de indios en tierra, por lo cual mandó el Almirante ir allá la barca con gente bien aderezada, los cuales luego vinieron todos a la popa de la barca, y especialmente el indio que el día antes había venido a la carabela y el Almirante le había dado las cosillas de rescate. Con éste dice que venía un rey, el cual había dado al indio dicho unas cuentas que diese a los de la barca en señal de seguro y de paz. Este rey, con tres de los suyos, entraron en la barca y vinieron a la carabela. Mandóles el Almirante dar de comer bizcocho y miel y diole un bonete colorado y cuentas y un pedazo de paño colorado, y a otros también pedazos de paño, el cual dijo que traería mañana una carátula de oro, afirmando que allí había mucho, y en Carib y Matinino. Después los envió a tierra bien contentos. Dice más el Almirante: que le hacían agua mucha las carabelas por la quilla, y quéjase mucho de los calafates que en Palos las calafatearon muy mal y que cuando vieron que el Almirante había entendido el defecto de su obra y los quisiera constreñir a que la enmendaran, huyeron; pero, no obstante la mucha agua que las carabelas hacían, confía en Nuestro Señor que lo trajo, le tornará por su piedad y misericordia, que bien sabía Su Alta Majestad cuánta controversia tuvo primero antes que se pudiese expedir de Castilla, que ninguno otro fue en su favor sino El, porque El sabía su corazón y, después de Dios, Sus Altezas, y todo lo demás le había sido contrario sin razón alguna. Y dice más así: «y han sido causa que la Corona Real de Vuestras Altezas no tenga cien cuentos de renta más de la que tiene después que yo vine a les servir, que son siete años ahora a 20 días de enero este mismo mes, y más lo que acrecentado sería de aquí en adelante. Mas aquel poderoso Dios remediará todo». Estas son sus palabras.
Martes, 15 de enero
Dice que quiere partir porque ya no aprovecha nada detenerse, por haber pasado aquellos desconciertos (debe decir del escándalo de los indios). Dice también que hoy ha sabido que toda la fuerza del oro estaba en la comarca de la Villa de la Navidad de Sus Altezas, y que en la isla de Carib había mucho alambre y en Matinino, puesto que será dificultoso en Carib, porque aquella gente dice que come carne humana, y que de allí se parecía la isla de ellos y que tenía determinado de ir allá, pues está en el camino, y a la de Matinino que dice que era poblada toda de mujeres sin hombres, y ver la una y la otra y tomar dice algunos de ellos. Envió el Almirante la barca a tierra, y el rey de aquella tierra no había venido, porque dice que la población estaba lejos; mas envió su corona de oro, como había prometido, y vinieron otros muchos hombres con algodón y con pan de ajes, todos con sus arcos y flechas. Después que todo lo hubieron rescatado, vinieron dice que cuatro mancebos a la carabela, y pareciéronle al Almirante dar tan buena cuenta de todas aquellas islas que estaban hacia el Este, en el mismo camino que el Almirante había de llevar, que determinó de traer a Castilla consigo. Allí dice que no tenían hierro ni otro metal que se hubiese visto, aunque en pocos días no se puede saber de una tierra mucho, así por la dificultad de la lengua, que no entendía el Almirante, sino por discreción, como porque ellos no saben lo que él pretendía en pocos días. Los arcos de aquella gente dice que eran tan grandes como los de Francia e Inglaterra; las flechas son propias como las azagayas de las otras gentes que hasta allí había visto, que son de los pimpollos de las cañas cuando son simiente, que quedan muy derechas y de longura de una vara y media y de dos, y después ponen al cabo un pedazo de palo agudo de un palmo y medio; y encima de este palillo algunos le injertan un diente de pescado, y algunos y los más le ponen allí hierba, y no tiran como en otras partes, salvo por una cierta manera que no pueden mucho ofender. Allí había mucho algodón y muy fino y luengo y hay muchas almácigas, y parecíale que los arcos eran de tejo, y que hay oro y cobre. También hay mucho ají, que es su pimienta, de ella que vale más que pimienta, y toda la gente no come sin ella, que la halla muy sana: puédense cargar cincuenta carabelas cada año en aquella Española. Dice que halló mucha hierba en aquella bahía, de la que hallaron en el golfo cuando venía el descubrimiento, por lo cual creía que había islas al Este hasta en derecho de donde las comenzó a hallar: porque tiene por cierto que aquella hierba nace en poco fondo junto a tierra; y dice que, si así es, muy cerca estaban estas Indias de las islas de Canaria, y por esta razón creía que distaban menos de cuatrocientas leguas.
Miércoles, 16 de enero
Partió antes del día, tres horas, del golfo que llamó el Golfo de las Flechas, con viento de la tierra, después con viento Oeste, llevando la proa al Este cuarta del Nordeste para ir dice que a la isla de Carib, donde estaba la gente de quien todas aquellas islas y tierras tanto miedo tenían, porque dice que con sus canoas sin número andaban todas aquellas mares y dice que comían los hombres que pueden haber. La derrota dice que le habían mostrado unos indios de aquellos cuatro que tomó ayer en el Puerto de las Flechas. Después de haber andado a su parecer sesenta y cuatro millas, señaláronle los indios quedaría la dicha isla al Sudeste; quiso llevar aquel camino y mandó templar las velas, y, después de haber andado dos leguas, refrescó el viento muy bueno para ir a España. Notó en la gente que comenzó a entristecerse por desviarse del camino derecho, por la mucha agua que hacían ambas carabelas, y no tenían algún remedio salvo el de Dios. Hubo de dejar el camino que creía que llevaba de la isla y volvió al derecho de España, Nordeste cuarta del Este, y anduvo así hasta el sol puesto cuarenta y ocho millas, que son doce leguas. Dijéronle los indios que por aquella vía hallaría la isla de Matinino, que dice que era poblada de mujeres sin hombres, lo cual el Almirante mucho quisiera por llevar dice que a los Reyes cinco o seis de ellas; pero dudaba que los indios supiesen bien la derrota, y él no se podía detener, por el peligro del agua que cogían las carabelas; mas dice que era cierto que las había, y que cierto tiempo del año venían los hombres a ellas de la dicha isla de Carib, que dice que estaba de ellas diez o doce leguas, y si parían niño enviábanlo a la isla de los hombres, y si niña dejábanla consigo. Dice el Almirante que aquellas dos islas no debían distar de donde había partido quince o veinte leguas, y creía que eran al Sudeste, y que los indios no le supieron señalar la derrota. Después de perder de vista el cabo que nombró de San Theramo, de la isla Española, que le quedaba al Oeste dieciséis leguas, anduvo doce leguas al Este cuarta del Nordeste. Llevaba muy buen tiempo.
Jueves, 17 de enero
Ayer, al poner del sol calmóse algo el viento; andaría catorce ampolletas, que tenía cada una media hora o poco menos, hasta el rendir del primer cuarto, y andaría cuatro millas por hora, que son veintiocho millas. Después refrescó el viento y anduvo así todo aquel cuarto, que fueron diez ampolletas, y después otras seis, hasta salido el sol, ocho millas por hora, y así andaría por todas ochenta y cuatro millas que son veintiuna leguas al Nordeste cuarta del Este, y hasta el sol puesto andaría más de cuarenta y cuatro millas, que son once leguas, al Este. Aquí vino un alcatraz a la carabela y después otro, y vio mucha hierba de la que está en la mar.
Viernes, 18 de enero
Navegó con poco viento esta noche al Este cuarta del Sudeste cuarenta millas, que son diez leguas, y después al Sudeste cuarta del Este treinta millas, que son siete leguas y media, hasta salido el sol. Después de salido el sol navegó todo el día con poco viento Esnordeste y Nordeste y con Este más y menos, puesta la proa a veces al Norte y a veces a la cuarta del Nordeste y al Nornordeste; y así, contando lo uno y lo otro, creyó que andaría sesenta millas, que son quince leguas. Pareció poca hierba en la mar; pero dice que ayer y hoy pareció la mar cuajada de atunes, y creyó el Almirante que de allí debían de ir a las almadrabas del Duque de Conil y de Cádiz. Por un pescado que se llama rabihorcado, que anduvo alrededor de la carabela y después se fue la vía del Sursudeste, creyó el Almirante que había por allí algunas islas. Y al Essueste de la isla Española dijo que quedaba la isla de Carib y la de Matinino y otras muchas.
Sábado, 19 de enero
Anduvo esta noche cincuenta y seis millas al Norte cuarta del Nordeste, y sesenta y cuatro al Nordeste cuarta del Norte. Después del sol salido, navegó al Nordeste con el viento Essueste, con viento fresco, y después a la cuarta del Norte, y andaría ochenta y cuatro millas, que son veintiuna leguas. Vino la mar cuajada de atunes pequeños: hubo alcatraces, rabos de juncos y rabihorcados.
Domingo, 20 de enero
Calmó el viento esta noche, y a ratos ventaba unas rachas de viento, y andaría por todo veinte millas al Nordeste. Después del sol salido, andaría once millas al Sudeste, después al Nornordeste treinta y seis millas, que son nueve leguas. Vio infinitos atunes pequeños. Los aires dice que muy suaves y dulces, como en Sevilla por abril o mayo, y la mar, dice, a Dios sean dadas muchas gracias, siempre muy llana. Rabihorcados y pardelas y otras aves muchas parecieron.
Lunes, 21 de enero
Ayer, después del sol puesto, navegó al Norte cuarta del Nordeste, con el viento Este y Nordeste: andaría ocho millas por hora hasta media noche, que serían cincuenta y seis millas. Después anduvo al Nornordeste ocho millas por hora, y así serían, en toda la noche, ciento cuatro millas, que son veintiséis leguas, a la cuarta del Norte de la parte del Nordeste. Después del sol salido, navegó al Nornordeste con el mismo viento Este, y a veces a la cuarta del Nordeste, y andaría ochenta y ocho millas en once horas que tenía el día, que son veintiuna leguas, sacada una que perdió porque arribó sobre la carabela Pinta por hablarle. Hallaba los aires más fríos, y pensaba dice que hallarlos más cada día cuanto más se llegase al Norte, y también por las noches ser más grandes por la angostura de la esfera. Parecieron muchos rabos de juncos y pardelas y otras aves; pero no tantos peces, dice que por ser el agua más fría. Vio mucha hierba.
Martes, 22 de enero
Ayer, después del sol puesto, navegó al Nornordeste con viento Este y tomaba del Sudeste; andaba ocho millas por hora hasta pasadas cinco ampolletas, y tres antes que se comenzase la guardia, que eran ocho ampolletas. Y así habría andado setenta y dos millas, que son dieciocho leguas. Después anduvo a la cuarta del Nordeste al Norte seis ampolletas, que serían otras dieciocho millas. Después cuatro ampolletas de la segunda guarda al Nordeste, seis millas por hora, que son tres leguas al Nordeste. Después, hasta el salir del sol, anduvo al Esnordeste once ampolletas, seis leguas por hora, que son siete leguas. Después al Esnordeste, hasta las once horas del día, treinta y dos millas. Y así calmó el viento y no anduvo más en aquel día. Nadaron los indios. Vieron rabos de juncos y mucha hierba.
Miércoles, 23 de enero
Esta noche tuvo muchos mudamientos en los vientos; tanteado todo y dados los resguardos que los marineros buenos suelen y deben dar, dice que andaría esta noche al Nordeste cuarta del Norte ochenta y cuatro millas, que son veintiuna leguas. Esperaba muchas veces a la carabela Pinta, porque andaba mal de la bolina, porque se ayudaba poco de la mesana por el mástil no ser bueno; y dice que si el capitán de ella, que es Martín Alonso Pinzón, tuviera tanto cuidado de proveerse de un buen mástil en las Indias, donde tantos y tales había, como fue codicioso de se apartar de él, pensando de henchir el navío de oro, él lo pusiera bueno. Parecieron muchos rabos de juncos y mucha hierba: el cielo todo turbado estos días; pero no había llovido, y la mar siempre muy llana como en un río, a Dios sean dadas muchas gracias. Después del sol salido, andaría al Nordeste franco cierta parte del día treinta millas, que son siete leguas y media, y después lo demás anduvo al Esnordeste otras treinta, que son siete leguas y media.
Jueves, 24 de enero
Andaría esta noche toda, consideradas muchas mudanzas que hizo el viento al Nordeste, cuarenta y cuatro millas, que fueron once leguas. Después de salido el sol hasta puesto, andaría al Esnordeste catorce leguas.
Viernes, 25 de enero
Navegó esta noche al Esnordeste un pedazo de la noche, que fueron trece ampolletas, nueve leguas y media; después anduvo al Nornordeste otras seis millas. Salido el sol todo el día, porque calmó el viento, andaría al Esnordeste veintiocho millas, que son siete leguas. Mataron los marineros una tonina y un grandísimo tiburón, y dice que lo habían bien menester, porque no traían ya de comer sino pan y vino y ajes de las Indias.
Sábado, 26 de enero
Esta noche anduvo al Este cuarta del Sudeste cincuenta y seis millas, que son catorce leguas. Después del sol salido, navegó a las veces al Essueste y a las veces al Sudeste; andaría hasta las once horas del día cuarenta millas. Después hizo otro bordo, y después anduvo a la relinga, y hasta la noche anduvo hacia el Norte veinticuatro millas, que son seis leguas.
Domingo, 27 de enero
Ayer, después del sol puesto, anduvo al Nordeste y al Norte, y al Norte cuarta del Nordeste, y andaría cinco millas por hora, y en trece horas serían sesenta y cinco millas, que son dieciséis leguas y media. Después del sol salido, anduvo hacia el Nordeste veinticuatro millas, que son seis leguas hasta mediodía, y de allí hasta el sol puesto andaría tres leguas al Esnordeste.
Lunes, 28 de enero
Esta noche toda navegó al Esnordeste, y andaría treinta y seis millas, que son nueve leguas. Después del sol salido, anduvo hasta el sol puesto al Esnordeste veinte millas, que son cinco leguas. Los aires halló templados y dulces. Vio rabos de juncos y pardelas y mucha hierba.
Martes, 29 de enero
Navegó al Esnordeste y andaría en la noche con Sur y Sudoeste treinta y nueve millas, que son nueve leguas y media. Entre todo el día andaría ocho leguas. Los aires muy templados como en abril en Castilla; la mar muy llana: peces que llaman dorados vinieron a bordo.
Miércoles, 30 de enero
En toda esta noche andaría siete leguas al Esnordeste. De día corrió al Sur cuarta al Sudeste, trece leguas y media. Vio rabos de juncos y mucha hierba y muchas toninas.
Jueves, 31 de enero
Navegó esta noche al Norte cuarta del Nordeste treinta millas, y después al Nordeste treinta y cinco millas, que son dieciséis leguas. Salido el sol, hasta la noche anduvo al Esnordeste trece leguas y media. Vieron rabos de junco y pardelas.
Viernes, 1 de febrero
Anduvo esta noche al Esnordeste dieciséis leguas y media. El día corrió al mismo camino veintinueve leguas y un cuarto; la mar muy llana, a Dios gracias.
Sábado, 2 de febrero
Anduvo esta noche al Esnordeste cuarenta millas, que son diez leguas. De día, con el mismo viento a popa, corrió siete millas por hora; por manera que en once horas anduvo setenta y siete millas, que son diecinueve leguas y cuarta; la mar muy llana, gracias a Dios, y los aires muy dulces. Vieron tan cuajada la mar de hierba que, si no la hubieran visto, temieran ser bajos. Pardelas vieron.
Domingo, 3 de febrero
Esta noche, yendo a popa con la mar muy llana, a Dios gracias, andaría veintinueve leguas. Parecióle la estrella del Norte muy alta, como en el Cabo de San Vicente. No pudo tomar la altura con el astrolabio ni cuadrante, porque la ola no le dio lugar. El día navegó al Esnordeste su camino, y andaría diez millas por hora, y, así, en once horas veintisiete leguas.
Lunes, 4 de febrero
Esta noche navegó al Este cuarta del Nordeste; parte anduvo doce millas por hora y parte diez, y así andaría ciento treinta millas, que son treinta y dos leguas y media. Tuvo el cielo muy turbado y lluvioso e hizo algún frío, por lo cual dice que conocía que no había llegado a las islas de los Azores. Después sol levantado, mudó el camino y fue al Este. Anduvo en todo el día setenta y siete millas, que son diecinueve leguas y cuarta.
Martes, 5 de febrero
Esta noche navegó al Este; andaría toda ella cincuenta y cuatro millas, que son catorce leguas menos media. El día corrió diez millas por hora, y, así, en once horas fueron ciento diez millas, que son veintisiete leguas y media. Vieron pardelas y unos palillos, que era señal que estaban cerca de tierra.
Miércoles, 6 de febrero
Navegó esta noche al Este; andaría once millas por hora. En trece horas de la noche andaría ciento cuarenta y tres millas, que son treinta y cinco leguas y cuarta. Vieron muchas aves y pardelas. El día corrió catorce millas por hora, y, así, anduvo aquel día ciento cincuenta y cuatro millas, que son treinta y ocho leguas y media; de manera que fueron, entre día y noche, sesenta y cuatro leguas poco más o menos. Vicente Yáñez dijo que hoy por la mañana le quedaba la isla de Flores al Norte y la de Madera al Este. Roldán dijo que la isla del Fayal o la de San Gregorio le quedaba al Nornordeste y el Puerto Santo al Este. Pareció mucha hierba.
Jueves, 7 de febrero
Navegó esta noche al Este; andaría diez millas por hora, y, así, en trece horas ciento y treinta millas, que son treinta y dos leguas y media; el día, ocho millas por hora, en once horas ochenta y ocho millas, que son veintidós leguas. En esta mañana estaba el Almirante al Sur de la isla de Flores sesenta y cinco leguas, y el piloto Pedro Alonso, yendo al Norte, pasaba entre la Tercera y la de Santa María, y al Este pasaba de barlovento de la isla de Madera doce leguas de la parte del Norte. Vieron los marineros hierba de otra manera que la pasada, de la que hay mucha en la isla de los Azores. Después se vio de la pasada.
Viernes, 8 de febrero
Anduvo esta noche tres millas por hora al Este por un rato, y después caminó a la cuarta del Sudeste; anduvo toda la noche doce leguas. Salido el sol, hasta mediodía corrió veintisiete millas; después, hasta el sol puesto, otras tantas, que son trece leguas al Sursudeste.
Sábado, 9 de febrero
Un rato de esta noche andaría tres leguas al Sursudeste; después al Sur cuarta del Sudeste; después al Nordeste, hasta las diez horas del día, otras cinco leguas, y después, hasta la noche, anduvo nueve leguas al Este.
Domingo, 10 de febrero
Después del sol puesto, navegó al Este toda la noche ciento treinta millas, que son treinta y dos leguas y media; el sol salido, hasta la noche anduvo nueve millas por hora, y así anduvo en once horas noventa y nueve millas, que son veinticuatro leguas y media y una cuarta.
En la carabela del Almirante carteaban y echaban punto Vicente Yáñez y los dos pilotos Sancho Ruiz y Pedro Alonso Niño y Roldán, y todos ellos pasaban mucho adelante de las islas de los Azores al Este por sus cartas; y, navegando al Norte, ninguno tomara la isla de Santa María, que es la postrera de todas las de los Azores. Antes, serían delante con cinco leguas, y fueran en la comarca de la isla de la Madera o en el Puerto Santo. Pero el Almirante se hallaba muy desviado de su camino, hallándose mucho más atrás que ellos, porque esta noche le quedaba la isla de Flores al Norte, y al Este iba en demanda a Nafe en África, y pasaba a barlovento de la isla de la Madera de la parte del Norte... leguas. Así que ellos estaba más cerca de Castilla que el Almirante con ciento cincuenta leguas. Dice que, mediante la gracia de Dios, desque vean tierra se sabrá quién andaba más cierto. Dice aquí también que primero anduvo doscientas sesenta y tres leguas de la isla del Hierro a la venida que viese la primera hierba, etc.
Lunes, 11 de febrero
Anduvo esta noche doce millas por hora a su camino, y, así, en toda ella contó treinta y nueve leguas, y en todo el día corrió dieciséis leguas y media. Vio muchas aves, de donde creyó estar cerca de tierra.
Martes, 12 de febrero
Navegó al Este seis millas por hora esta noche, y andaría hasta el día setenta y tres millas, que son dieciocho leguas y un cuarto. Aquí comenzó a tener grande mar y tormenta: y, si no fuera la carabela dice que muy buena y bien aderezada, temiera perderse. El día correría once o doce leguas, con mucho trabajo y peligro.
Miércoles, 13 de febrero
Después del sol puesto hasta el día, tuvo gran trabajo del viento y de la mar muy alta y tormenta; relampagueó hacia el Nordeste tres veces; dijo ser señal de gran tempestad que había de venir de aquella parte o de su contrario. Anduvo a árbol seco lo más de la noche; después dio una poca de vela y andaría cincuenta y dos millas, que son trece leguas. En este día blandeó un poco el viento; pero luego creció y la mar se hizo terrible y cruzaban las olas que atormentaban los navíos. Andaría cincuenta y cinco millas, que son trece leguas y media.
Jueves, 14 de febrero
Esta noche creció el viento y las olas eran espantables, contraria una de otra, que cruzaban y embarazaban el navío que no podía pasar adelante ni salir de entremedias de ellas y quebraban en él; llevaba el papahígo muy bajo, para que solamente lo sacase algo de las ondas: andaría así tres horas y correría veinte millas. Crecía mucho la mar y el viento; y, viendo el peligro grande, comenzó a correr a popa donde el viento lo llevase, porque no había otro remedio. Entonces comenzó a correr también la carabela Pinta, en que iba Martín Alonso, y desapareció, aunque toda la noche hizo faroles el Almirante y el otro le respondía; hasta que parece que no pudo más por la fuerza de la tormenta y porque se hallaba muy fuera del camino del Almirante. Anduvo el Almirante esta noche al Nordeste cuarta del Este, cincuenta y cuatro millas, que son trece leguas. Salido el sol, fue mayor el viento y la mar cruzando más terrible: llevaba el papahígo solo y bajo, para que el navío saliese de entre las ondas que cruzaban, porque no lo hundiesen. Andaba el camino del Esnordeste, y después a la cuarta hasta el Nordeste; andaría seis horas así, y en ellas siete leguas y media. El ordenó que se echase un romero que fuese a Santa María de Guadalupe y llevase un cirio de cinco libras de cera y que hiciesen voto todos que al que cayese la suerte cumpliese la romería, para lo cual mandó traer tantos garbanzos cuantas personas en el navío venían y señalar uno con un cuchillo haciendo una cruz y meterlos en un bonete bien revueltos. El primero que metió la mano fue el Almirante y sacó el garbanzo de la cruz, y así cayó sobre él la suerte y desde luego se tuvo por romero y deudor de ir a cumplir el voto. Echóse otra vez la suerte para enviar romero a Santa María de Loreto, que está en la marca de Ancona, tierra del Papa, que es casa donde Nuestra Señora ha hecho y hace muchos y grandes milagros, y cayó la suerte a un marinero del Puerto de Santa María, que se llamaba Pedro de Villa, y el Almirante le prometió de le dar dineros para las costas. Otro romero acordó que se enviase a que velase una noche en Santa Clara de Moguer e hiciese decir una misa, para lo cual se tornaron a echar los garbanzos con el de la cruz, y cayó la suerte al mismo Almirante. Después de esto, el Almirante y toda la gente hicieron voto de, en llegando a la primera tierra, ir todos en camisa en procesión a hacer oración en una iglesia que fuese de la invocación de Nuestra Señora.
Allende los votos generales o comunes, cada uno hacía en especial su voto, porque ninguno pensaba escapar, teniéndose todos por perdidos, según la terrible tormenta que padecían. Ayudaba a acrecentar el peligro que venía el navío con falta de lastre, por haberse alivianado la carga, siendo ya comidos los bastimentos y el agua y vino bebido, lo cual, por codicia del próspero tiempo que entre las islas tuvieron, no proveyó el Almirante, teniendo propósito de lo mandar lastrar en la isla de las Mujeres, adonde llevó propósito de ir. El remedio que para esta necesidad tuvo fue, cuando hacerlo pudieron, henchir las pipas que tenían vacías de agua y vino, de agua de la mar, y con esto en ella se remediaron. Escribe aquí el Almirante las causas que le ponían temor de que allí Nuestro Señor no quisiese que pereciese y otras que le daban esperanza de que Dios lo había de llevar en salvamento, para que tales nuevas como llevaba a los Reyes no pereciesen. Parecíale que el deseo grande que tenía de llevar estas nuevas tan grandes y mostrar que había salido verdadero en lo que había dicho y proferídose a descubrir, le ponía grandísimo miedo de no lo conseguir, y que cada mosquito dice que le podía perturbar e impedir. Atribúyelo esto a su poca fe y desfallecimiento de confianza de la Providencia Divina. Confortábanle, por otra parte, las mercedes que Dios le había hecho en darle tanta victoria, descubriendo lo que descubierto había y cumplídole Dios todos sus deseos, habiendo pasado en Castilla en sus despachos muchas adversidades y contrariedades. Y que como antes hubiese puesto su fin y enderezado todo su negocio a Dios y le había oído y dado todo lo que le había pedido, debía creer que le daría cumplimiento de lo comenzado y le llevaría en salvamento. Mayormente que, pues le había librado a la ida, cuando tenía mayor razón de temer de los trabajos que tenía con los marineros y gente que llevaba, los cuales todos a una voz estaban determinados de se volver y alzarse contra él haciendo protestaciones, y el eterno Dios le dio esfuerzo y valor contra todos y otras cosas de mucha maravilla que Dios había mostrado en él y por él en aquel viaje, allende aquellas que Sus Altezas sabían de las personas de su casa; así que dice que no debiera temer la dicha tormenta. Mas su flaqueza y congoja -dice él- «no me dejaba asentar la ánima». Dice más, que también le daban gran pena dos hijos que tenía en Córdoba al estudio, que los dejaba huérfanos de padre y madre en tierra extraña, y los Reyes no sabían los servicios que les había en aquel viaje hecho y las nuevas tan prósperas que les llevaba para que se moviesen a los remediar. Por esto y porque supiesen Sus Altezas cómo Nuestro Señor le había dado victoria de todo lo que deseaba de las Indias y supiesen que ninguna tormenta había en aquellas partes, lo cual dice que se puede conocer por la hierba y los árboles que están nacidos y crecidos hasta dentro en la mar, y porque si se perdiese con aquella tormenta los Reyes hubiesen noticia de su viaje, tomó un pergamino y escribió en él todo lo que pudo de todo lo que había hallado, rogando mucho a quien lo hallase que lo llevase a los Reyes. Este pergamino envolvió en un paño encerado, atado muy bien, y mandó traer un gran barril de madera y púsolo en él sin que ninguna persona supiese qué era, sino que pensaron todos que era alguna devoción; y así lo mandó echar en la mar. Después, con los aguaceros y turbionadas, se mudó el viento al Oeste, y andaría así a popa sólo con el trinquete cinco horas con la mar muy desconcertada; y andaría dos leguas y media al Nordeste. Había quitado el papahígo de la vela mayor, por miedo que alguno onda de la mar no se lo llevase del todo.
Viernes, 15 de febrero
Ayer, después del sol puesto, comenzó a mostrarse claro el cielo de la banda del Oeste, y mostraba que quería de hacia allí ventar. Dio la boneta a la vela mayor: todavía era la mar altísima, aunque iba algo bajándose. Anduvo al Esnordeste cuatro millas por hora y en trece horas de noche fueron trece leguas. Después del sol salido vieron tierra: parecíales por proa al Esnordeste; algunos decían que era la isla de la Madera, otros que era la Roca de Sintra en Portugal, junto a Lisboa. Saltó luego el viento por proa Esnordeste, y la mar venía muy alta del Oeste; habría de la carabela a tierra cinco leguas. El Almirante, por su navegación, se hallaba estar con las islas de los Azores, y creía que aquella era una de ellas: los pilotos y marineros se hallaban ya con tierra de Castilla.
Sábado, 16 de febrero
Toda esta noche anduvo dando bordos por encabalgar la tierra que ya se conocía ser isla. A veces iba al Nordeste, otras al Nornordeste, hasta que salió el sol, que tomó la vuelta del Sur por llegar a la isla que ya no veían por la gran cerrazón, y vio por popa otra isla que distaría ocho leguas. Después del sol salido, hasta la noche anduvo dando vueltas por llegarse a la tierra con el mucho viento y mar que llevaba. Al decir la Salve, que es a boca d noche, algunos vieron lumbre de sotavento, y parecía que debía ser la isla que vieron ayer primero; y toda la noche anduvo barloventeando y allegándose lo más que podía para ver si al salir del sol veía alguna de las islas. Esta noche reposó el Almirante algo, porque desde el miércoles no había dormido ni podido dormir, y quedaba muy tullido de las piernas por estar siempre desabrigado al frío y al agua y por el poco comer. El sol salido, navegó al Sursudoeste, y a la noche llegó a la isla y por la gran cerrazón no pudo conocer qué isla era.
Lunes, 18 de febrero
Ayer, después del sol puesto, anduvo rodeando la isla para ver dónde había de surgir y tomar lengua. Surgió con un anda que luego perdió. Tomó a dar la vela y barloventeó toda la noche. Después del sol salido, llegó otra vez de la parte del Norte de la isla, y donde le pareció surgió con un anda, y envió la barca en tierra y hubieron habla con la gente de la isla, y supieron cómo era la isla de Santa María, una de las de los Azores, y enseñáronles el puerto donde habían de poner la carabela; y dijo la gente de la isla que jamás habían visto tanta tormenta como la que había hecho los quince días pasados y que se maravillaban cómo habían escapado; los cuales dice que dieron gracias a Dios e hicieron muchas alegrías por las nuevas que sabían de haber el Almirante descubierto las Indias. Dice el Almirante que aquella su navegación había sido muy cierta y que había carteado bien, que fuesen dadas muchas gracias a Nuestro Señor, aunque se hacía algo delantero. Pero tenía por cierto que estaba en la comarca de las islas de los Azores, y que aquélla era una de ellas. Y dice que fingió haber andado más camino por desatinar a los pilotos y marineros que carteaban, por quedar él señor de aquella derrota de las Indias, como de hecho queda, porque ninguno de todos ellos traía su camino cierto, por lo cual ninguno puede estar seguro de su derrota para las Indias.
Martes, 19 de febrero
Después del sol puesto, vinieron a la ribera tres hombres de la isla y llamaron. Envióles la barca, en la cual vinieron y trajeron gallinas y pan fresco, y era día de Carnestolendas, y trajeron otras cosas que enviaba el capitán de la isla, que se llamaba Joáo da Castanheira, diciendo que lo conocía muy bien y que por ser noche no venía a verlo; pero en amaneciendo vendría y traería más refresco, y traería consigo tres hombres que allá quedaban de la carabela, y que no los enviaba por el gran placer que con ellos tenía oyendo las cosas de su viaje. El Almirante mandó hacer mucha honra a los mensajeros, y mandóles dar camas en que durmiesen aquella noche, porque era tarde y estaba la población lejos. Y porque el jueves pasado, cuando se vio en la angustia de la tormenta, hicieron el voto y votos susodichos y el de que en la primera tierra donde hubiese casa de Nuestra Señora saliesen en camisa, etc., acordó que la mitad de la gente fuese a cumplirlo a una casita que estaba junto con la mar como ermita, y él iría después con la otra mitad. Viendo que era tierra segura, y confiando en las ofertas del capitán y en la paz que tenía Portugal con Castilla, rogó a los tres hombres que se fuesen a la población e hiciesen venir un clérigo para que les dijese una misa. Los cuales, idos en camisa, en cumplimiento de su romería, y estando en su oración, saltó con ellos todo el pueblo a caballo y a pie con el capitán y prendiéronlos a todos. Después, estando el Almirante sin sospecha esperando la barca para salir él a cumplir su romería con la otra gente hasta las once del día, viendo que no venían, sospechó que los tenían o que la barca se había quebrado, porque toda la isla está cercada de peñas muy altas. Esto no podía ver el Almirante porque la ermita estaba detrás de una punta. Levantó el anda y dio la vela hasta en derecho de la ermita, y vio muchos de caballo que se apearon y entraron en la barca con armas, y vinieron a la carabela para prender al Almirante. Levantóse el capitán en la barca y pidió seguro al Almirante. Dijo que se lo daba; pero ¿qué innovación era aquélla que no veía ninguna de su gente en la barca?, y añadió el Almirante que viniese y entrase en la carabela, que él haría todo lo que él quisiese. Y pretendía el Almirante con buenas palabras traerlo por prenderlo para recuperar su gente, no creyendo que violaba la fe dándole seguro, pues él, habiéndole ofrecido paz y seguridad, lo había quebrantado. El capitán, como dice que traía mal propósito, no se fió a entrar. Visto que no se llegaba a la carabela, rogóle que le dijese la causa porque detenía su gente, y que de ello pesaría al Rey de Portugal, y que en tierra de los Reyes de Castilla recibían los portugueses mucha honra y entraban y estaban seguros como en Lisboa, y que los Reyes le habían dado carta de recomendación para todos los príncipes y señores y hombres del mundo, las cuales le mostraría si se quisiese llegar; y que él era su Almirante del Mar Océano y Virrey de las Indias, que ahora eran de Sus Altezas, de lo cual mostraría las provisiones firmadas de sus firmas y selladas con sus sellos, las cuales les enseñó de lejos, y que los Reyes estaban en mucho amor y amistad con el Rey de Portugal y le habían mandado que hiciese toda la honra que pudiese a los navíos que topase de Portugal, y que, dado que no le quisiese darle su gente, no por eso dejaría de ir a Castilla, pues tenía harta gente para navegar hasta Sevilla, y serían él y su gente bien castigados, haciéndoles aquel agravio. Entonces respondió el capitán y los demás no conocer acá Rey y Reina de Castilla, ni sus cartas, ni le habían miedo; antes les darían a saber qué era Portugal, casi amenazando. Lo cual oído, el Almirante hubo mucho sentimiento, y dice que pensó si había pasado algún desconcierto entre un reino y otro después de su partida, y no se pudo sufrir que no les respondiese lo que era razón. Después tornóse dice que a levantar aquel capitán desde lejos y dijo al Almirante que se fuese con la carabela al puerto, y que todo lo que él hacía y había hecho, el Rey su Señor se lo había enviado a mandar; de lo cual el Almirante tomó testigos los que en la carabela estaban, y tomó el Almirante a llamar al capitán y a todos ellos y les dio su fe y prometió, como quien era, de no descender ni salir de la carabela hasta que llevase un ciento de portugueses a Castilla y despoblar toda aquella isla. Y así se volvió a surgir en el puerto donde estaba primero, porque el tiempo y viento era muy malo para hacer otra cosa.
Miércoles, 20 de febrero
Mandó aderezar el navío y henchir las pipas de agua de la mar por lastre, porque estaba en muy mal puerto y temió que se le cortasen las amarras, y así fue; por lo cual dio la vela hacia la isla de San Miguel, aunque en ninguna de la de los Azores hay buen puerto para el tiempo que entonces hacía, y no tenía otro remedio sino huir a la mar.
Jueves, 21 de febrero
Partió ayer de aquella isla de Santa María para la de San Miguel, para ver si hallaba puerto para poder sufrir tan mal tiempo como hacía, con mucho viento y mucha mar, y anduvo hasta la noche sin poder ver tierra una ni otra por la gran cerrazón y oscuridad que el viento y la mar causaban. El Almirante dice que estaba con poco placer, porque no tenía sino tres marineros solos que supiesen de la mar, porque los que más allí estaban no sabían de la mar nada. Estuvo a la corda toda la noche con muy mucha tormenta y grande peligro y trabajo, y en lo que Nuestro Señor le hizo merced fue que la mar o las ondas de ella venían de sola una parte, porque si cruzaran como las pasadas, muy mayor mal padeciera. Después del sol salido, visto que no veía la isla de San Miguel, acordó tornarse a la Santa María por ver si podía cobrar su gente y la barca y las amarras y anclas que allá dejaba. Dice que estaba maravillado de tan mal tiempo como había en aquellas islas y partes, porque en las Indias navegó todo aquel invierno sin surgir, y había siempre buenos tiempos, y que una sola hora no vio la mar que no se pudiese bien navegar, y en aquellas islas había padecido tan grave tormenta, y lo mismo le acaeció a la ida hasta las Islas de Canaria; pero, pasado de ellas, siempre halló los aires y la mar con gran templanza. Concluyendo, dice el Almirante que bien dijeron los sacros teólogos y los sabios filósofos que el Paraíso Terrenal está en el fin de Oriente, porque es lugar temperadísimo. Así que aquellas tierras que ahora él había descubierto es -dice él- el fin del Oriente.
Viernes, 22 de febrero
Ayer surgió en la isla de Santa María en el lugar o puerto donde primero había surgido, y luego vino un hombre a capear desde unas peñas que allí estaban fronteras, diciendo que no se fuesen de allí. Luego vino la barca con cinco marineros, dos clérigos y un escribano: pidieron seguro, y, dado por el Almirante, subieron a la carabela; y porque era noche durmieron allí, y el Almirante les hizo la honra que pudo. A la mañana le requirieron que les mostrase poder de los Reyes de Castilla para que a ellos les contase cómo con poder de ellos había hecho aquel viaje. Sintió el Almirante que aquello hacían por mostrar color que no habían en lo hecho errado, sino que tuvieron razón, porque no habían podido haber la persona del Almirante, la cual debieran de pretender coger a las manos, pues vinieron con la barca armada, sino que no vieron que el juego les saliera bien, y con temor de lo que el Almirante había dicho y amenazado; lo cual tenía propósito de hacer, y creyó que saliera con ello. Finalmente, por haber la gente que le tenían, hubo de mostrarles la carta general de los Reyes para todos los príncipes y señores de encomienda y otras provisiones; y dioles de lo que tenía y fuéronse a tierra contentos, y luego dejaron toda la gente con la barca, de los cuales supo que si tomaran al Almirante nunca lo dejaran libre; porque dijo el capitán que el Rey, su señor, se lo había así mandado.
Sábado, 23 de febrero
Ayer comenzó a querer abonanzar el tiempo; levantó las anclas y fue a rodear la isla para buscar algún buen surgidero para tomar leña y piedra para lastre, y no pudo tomar surgidero hasta dos horas completas.
Domingo, 24 de febrero
Surgió ayer en la tarde para tomar leña y piedra, y, porque la mar era muy alta no pudo la barca llegar en tierra; y, al rendir de la primera guardia de noche, comenzó a ventar Oeste y Sudoeste. Mandó levantar las velas por el gran peligro que en aquellas islas hay en esperar el viento Sur sobre el anda, y en ventando Sudoeste luego vienta Sur. Y, visto que era buen tiempo para ir a Castilla, dejó de tomar leña y piedra e hizo que gobernasen al Este; y andaría hasta el sol salido, que haría seis horas y media, siete millas por hora, que son cuarenta y cinco millas y media. Después del sol salido hasta el ponerse, anduvo seis millas por hora, que en once horas fueron sesenta y seis millas, y cuarenta y cinco y media de la noche fueron ciento once y media, y por consiguiente, veintiocho leguas.
Lunes, 25 de febrero
Ayer, después del sol puesto, navegó al Este su camino cinco millas por hora: en trece horas de esta noche andaría sesenta y cinco millas, que son dieciséis leguas y cuarta. Después del sol salido, hasta ponerse, anduvo otras dieciséis leguas y media con la mar llana, gracias a Dios. Vino a la carabela un ave muy grande que parecía águila.
Martes, 26 de febrero
Ayer, después del sol puesto, navegó a su camino al Este, la mar llana, a Dios gracias: lo más de la noche andaría ocho millas por hora; anduvo cien millas, que son veinticinco leguas. Después del sol salido, con poco viento, tuvo aguaceros; anduvo obra de ocho leguas al Esnordeste.
Miércoles, 27 de febrero
Esta noche y día anduvo fuera de camino por los vientos contrarios y grandes olas y mar, y hallábase ciento veinticinco leguas del Cabo de San Vicente, y ochenta de la isla de la Madera y ciento seis de la Santa María. Estaba muy penado con tanta tormenta, ahora que estaba a la puerta de casa.
Jueves, 28 de febrero
Anduvo de la misma manera esta noche con diversos vientos al Sur y al Sudeste, y a una parte y a otra, y al Nordeste y al Esnordeste, y de esta manera todo este día.
Viernes, 1 de marzo
Anduvo esta noche al Este cuarta del Nordeste, doce leguas; de día corrió al Este cuarta del Nordeste, veintitrés leguas y media.
Sábado, 2 de marzo
Anduvo esta noche a su camino al Este cuarta del Nordeste, veintiocho leguas; y el día corrió veinte leguas.
Domingo, 3 de marzo
Después del sol puesto navegó a su camino al Este. Vínole una turbonada que le rompió todas las velas, y viose en gran peligro, mas Dios los quiso librar. Echó suertes para enviar un peregrino dice a Santa María de la Cinta en Huelva, que fuese en camisa, y cayó la suerte al Almirante. Hicieron todos también voto de ayunar el primer sábado que llegasen a pan y agua. Andaría sesenta millas antes que se le rompiesen las velas; después anduvieron a árbol seco, por la gran tempestad del viento y la mar que de dos partes los comía. Vieron señales de estar cerca de tierra. Hallábanse todo cerca de Lisboa.
Lunes, 4 de marzo
Anoche padecieron terrible tormenta, que se pensaron perder de las mares de dos partes que venían y los vientos, que parecía que levantaban la carabela en los aires, y agua del cielo y relámpagos de muchas partes; plugo a Nuestro Señor de lo sostener, y anduvo así hasta la primera guardia, que Nuestro Señor le mostró tierra, viéndola los marineros. Y entonces, por no llegar a ella hasta conocerla, por ver si hallaba algún puerto o lugar donde se salvar, dio el papahígo por no tener otro remedio y andar algo, aunque con gran peligro, haciéndose a la mar; y así los guardó Dios hasta el día, que dice que fue con infinito trabajo y espanto. Venido el día, conoció la tierra, que era la Roca de Sintra, que es junto con el río de Lisboa, adonde determinó entrar, porque no podía hacer otra cosa: tan terrible era la tormenta que hacía en la villa de Cascaes, que es a la entrada del río. Los del pueblo dice que estuvieron toda aquella mañana haciendo plegarias por ellos, y, después que estuvo dentro, venía la gente a verlos por maravilla de cómo habían escapado; y así, a hora de tercia, vino a pasar a Rastelo dentro del río de Lisboa, donde supo de la gente de la mar que jamás hizo invierno de tantas tormentas y que se habían perdido veinticinco naos en Flandes y otras estaban allí que había cuatro meses que no habían podido salir. Luego escribió el Almirante al Rey de Portugal, que estaba a nueve leguas de allí, cómo los Reyes de Castilla le habían mandado que no dejase de entrar en los puertos de Su Alteza a pedir lo que hubiese menester por sus dineros, y que el Rey le mandase dar lugar para ir con la carabela a la ciudad de Lisboa, porque algunos ruines, pensando que traía mucho oro, estando en puerto despoblado, se pusiesen a cometer alguna ruindad, y también porque supiese que no venía de Guinea, sino de las Indias.
Martes, 5 de marzo
Hoy, después que el patrón de la nao grande del Rey de Portugal, la cual estaba también surta en Rastelo y la más bien artillada de artillería y armas que dice que nunca nao se vio, vino el patrón de ella, que se llamaba Bartolomé Díaz de Lisboa, con el batel armado a la carabela, y dijo al Almirante que entrase en el batel para ir a dar cuenta a los hacedores del Rey y al capitán de la dicha nao. Respondió el Almirante que él era Almirante de los Reyes de Castilla y que no daba él tales cuentas a tales personas, ni saldría de las naos ni navíos donde estuviese si no fuese por la fuerza de no poder sufrir las armas. Respondió el patrón que enviase al maestre de la carabela. Dijo el Almirante que ni al maestre ni a otra persona si no fuese por fuerza, porque en tanto tenía el dar persona que fuese como ir él, y que ésta era la costumbre de los Almirantes de los Reyes de Castilla, de antes morir que se dar ni dar gente suya. El patrón se moderó y dijo que, pues estaba en aquella determinación, que fuese como él quisiese; pero que le rogaba que le mandase mostrar las cartas de los Reyes de Castilla si las tenía. El Almirante plugo de mostrárselas, y luego se volvió a la nao e hizo relación al capitán, que se llamaba Álvaro Damán, el cual, con mucha orden, con atabales y trompetas y añafiles, haciendo gran fiesta, vino a la carabela y habló con el Almirante y le ofreció de hacer todo lo que le mandase.
Miércoles, 6 de marzo
Sabido cómo el Almirante venía de las Indias, hoy vino tanta gente a verlo y a ver los indios, de la ciudad de Lisboa, que era cosa de admiración, y las maravillas que todos hacían, dando gracias a Nuestro Señor y diciendo que, por la gran fe que los Reyes de Castilla tenían y deseo de servir a Dios, que Su Alta Majestad los daba todo esto.
Jueves, 7 de marzo
Hoy vino infinitísima gente a la carabela y muchos caballeros, y entre ellos los hacedores del Rey, y todos daban infinitísimas gracias a Nuestro Señor por tanto bien y acrecentamiento de la Cristiandad que Nuestro Señor había dado a los Reyes de Castilla, el cual dice que apropiaban porque Sus Altezas se trabajaban y ejercitaban en el acrecentamiento de la religión de Cristo.
Viernes, 8 de marzo
Hoy recibió el Almirante una carta del Rey de Portugal con D. Martín de Noronha, por la cual le rogaba que se llegase adonde él estaba, pues el tiempo no era para partir con la carabela; y así lo hizo por quitar sospecha, puesto que no quisiera ir, y fue a dormir a Sacamben. Mandó el Rey a sus hacedores que todo lo que hubiese el Almirante menester y su gente y la carabela se lo diese sin dineros y se hiciese todo como el Almirante quisiese.
Sábado, 9 de marzo
Hoy partió de Sacamben para ir adonde el Rey estaba, que era el valle del Paraíso, nueve leguas de Lisboa: porque llovió no pudo llegar hasta la noche. El Rey le mandó recibir a los principales de su casa muy honradamente, y el Rey también le recibió con mucha honra y le hizo mucho favor y mandó sentar y habló muy bien, ofreciéndole que mandaría hacer todo lo que a los Reyes de Castilla y a su servicio cumpliese cumplidamente y más que por cosa suya; y mostró haber mucho placer del viaje haber habido buen término y se haber hecho, mas que entendía que en la capitulación que había entre los Reyes y él que aquella conquista le pertenecía . A lo cual respondió el Almirante que no había visto la capitulación ni sabía otra cosa sino que los Reyes le habían mandado que no fuese a la Mina ni en toda Guinea, y que así se había mandado pregonar en todos los puertos del Andalucía antes que para el viaje partiese. El Rey graciosamente respondió que tenía él por cierto que no habría en esto menester terceros. Diole por huésped al prior del Clato, que era la más principal persona que allí estaba, del cual el Almirante recibió muy muchas honras y favores.
Domingo, 10 de marzo
Hoy, después de misa, le tomó a decir el Rey si había menester algo, que luego se le daría, y departió mucho con el Almirante sobre su viaje, y siempre le mandaba estar sentado y hacer mucha honra.
Lunes, 11 de marzo
Hoy se despidió del Rey, y le dijo algunas cosas que dijese de su parte a los Reyes, mostrándole siempre mucho amor. Partióse después de comer, y envió con él a D. Martín de Noronha, y todos aquellos caballeros le vinieron a acompañar y hacer honra buen rato. Después vino a un monasterio de San Antonio, que es sobre un lugar que se llama Villafranca, donde estaba la Reina; y fuele a hacer reverencia y besarle las manos, porque le había enviado a decir que no se fuese hasta que la viese, con la cual estaban el Duque y el Marques, donde recibió el Almirante mucha honra. Partióse de ella el Almirante de noche, y fue a dormir a Allandra.
Martes, 12 de marzo
Hoy, estando para partir de Allandra para la carabela, llegó un escudero del Rey que le ofreció de su parte que, si quisiese ir a Castilla por tierra, que aquél fuese con él para lo aposentar y mandar dar bestias y todo lo que hubiese menester. Cuando el Almirante de él se partió, le mandó dar una mula y otra a su piloto, que llevaba consigo, y dice que al piloto mandó hacer merced de veinte espadines, según supo el Almirante. Todo dice que se decía que lo hacía porque los Reyes lo supiesen. Llegó a la carabela en la noche.
Miércoles, 13 de marzo
Hoy a las ocho horas, con la marea de ingente y el viento Nornoroeste, levantó las anclas y dio la vela para ir a Sevilla.
Jueves, 14 de marzo
Ayer, después del sol puesto, siguió su camino al Sur, y antes del sol salido se halló sobre el Cabo de San Vicente, que es en Portugal. Después navegó al Este para ir a Saltés, y anduvo todo el día con poco viento hasta ahora que está sobre Faro.
Viernes, 15 de marzo
Ayer, después del sol puesto, navegó a su camino hasta el día con poco viento, y al salir del sol se halló sobre Saltés, y a hora de mediodía, con la marea de montante, entró por la barra de Saltés hasta dentro del puerto de donde había partido a 3 de agosto del año pasado Y así dice él que acababa ahora esta escritura, salvo que estaba de propósito de ir a Barcelona por la mar, en la cual ciudad le daban nuevas que Sus Altezas estaban, y esto para les hacer relación de todo su viaje que Nuestro Señor le había dejado hacer y le quiso alumbrar en él. Porque ciertamente, allende que él sabía y tenía firme y fuerte sin escrúpulo que Su Alta Majestad hace todas las cosas buenas y que todo es bueno salvo el pecado y que no se puede abalar ni pensar cosa que no sea con su consentimiento, «esto de este viaje conozco -dice el Almirante- que milagrosamente lo ha mostrado, así como se puede comprender por esta escritura, por muchos milagros señalados mostrados en el viaje, y de mi, que ha tanto tiempo que estoy en la Corte de Vuestras Altezas con opósito y contra sentencia de tantas personas principales de vuestra casa, los cuales todos eran contra mí poniendo este hecho que era burla. El cual espero en Nuestro Señor que será la mayor honra de la Cristiandad que así ligeramente haya jamás acaecido». Estas son finales palabras del Almirante D. Cristóbal Colón de su primer viaje a las Indias y al descubrimiento de ellas.

